---
id: "exception_f23b1ee991fe7cf27c0d59ce"
type: "exception"
status: "open"
title: "Drift audit: question_1e0121d4bdc2f58cea1ca426"
created_at: "2026-07-19T03:07:16+08:00"
updated_at: "2026-07-19T03:07:16+08:00"
aliases: []
tags: ["memory-drift"]
domains: []
confidence: "unknown"
source_ids: []
relations: []
exception_kind: "memory-drift"
severity: "attention"
object_id: "question_1e0121d4bdc2f58cea1ca426"
reasons: ["correlation-to-causation"]
context: {"drift_report_id": "drift_28ee3d3cceae7f8dc4aae2bf", "object_id": "question_1e0121d4bdc2f58cea1ca426", "object_versions_compared": ["vault/archive/versions/question_1e0121d4bdc2f58cea1ca426/1a95c43692ea623d0d445b060acfbb3483371e3f190a903553a6ea9503b9aa74.md", "vault/memory/question/question_1e0121d4bdc2f58cea1ca426.md"], "source_evidence_ids": [], "drift_type": "correlation-to-causation", "severity": "high", "original_statement": "# “How would j’s action change if I had acted\n\n“How would j’s action change if I had acted\n\ndifferently in this situation?”.\nBy sampling several counterfactual actions, and av-\neraging the resulting policy distribution of j in\neach case, we obtain the marginal policy of j,\np(aj\nt|sj\nt ) = ∑\n˜ak\nt\np(aj\nt|˜ak\nt,sj\nt )p(˜ak\nt|sj\nt ) —in other words,\nj’s policy if it did not consider agentk. The discrepancy\nbetween the marginal policy ofj and the conditional policy\nofj givenk’s action is a measure of the causal inﬂuence\nofk onj; it gives the degree to whichj changes its planned\naction distribution because ofk’s action. Thus, the causal\ninﬂuence reward for agentk is:\nck\nt =\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt )\n\n∑\n˜ak\nt\np(aj\nt| ˜ak\nt,sj\nt )p(˜ak\nt|sj\nt )]\n]\n=\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt )\np(aj\nt|sj\nt )]\n]\n. (1)\nNote that it is possible to use a divergence metric other than\nKL; we have found empirically that the inﬂuence reward is\nrobust to the choice of metric.\nThe reward in Eq. 4 is related to the mutual information (MI)\nbetween the actions of agentsk andj,I(ak;aj|s). As the\nreward is computed over many trajectories sampled inde-\npendently from the environment, we obtain a Monte-Carlo\nestimate ofI(ak;aj|s). In expectation, the inﬂuence reward\nincentivizes agents to maximize the mutual information\nbetween their actions. The proof is given in Section 10.1\nof the Supplementary Material. Intuitively, training agents\nto maximize the MI between their actions results in more\ncoordinated behavior.\nMoreover, the variance of policy gradient updates increases\nas the number of agents in the environment grows (Lowe et al.,\n2017). This issue can hinder convergence to equilibrium for\nlarge-scale MARL tasks. Social inﬂuence can reduce the\nvariance of policy gradients by introducing explicit depen-\ndencies across the actions of each agent. This is because the\nconditional variance of the gradients an agent is receiving\nwill be less than or equal to the marginalized variance.\nNote that for the basic inﬂuence model we make two assump-\ntions: 1) we use centralized training to computeck\nt directly\nfrom the policy of agentj, and 2) we assume that inﬂuence is\nunidirectional: agents trained with the inﬂuence reward can\nonly inﬂuence agents that are not trained with the inﬂuence\nreward (the sets of inﬂuencers and inﬂuencees are disjoint,\nand the number of inﬂuencers is in[1,N−1]). Both of these\nassumptions are relaxed in later sections. Further details, as\nwell as further explanation of the causal inference procedure\n(including causal diagrams) are available in Section 8.\n4.1. Experiment I: Basic Inﬂuence\nFigure 1 shows the results of testing agents trained with the\nbasic inﬂuence reward against standard A3C agents, and an\nablated version of the model in which agents do not receive\nthe inﬂuence reward, but are able to condition their policy\non the actions of other agents (even when the other agents\nare not within the agent’s partially observed view of the\nenvironment). We term this ablated model thevisible actions\nbaseline. In this and all other results ﬁgures, we measure\nthe total collective reward obtained using the best hyper-\nparameter setting tested with 5 random seeds each. Error\nbars show a 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) over the random\nseeds, computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps.\nWe use a curriculum learning approach which gradually\nincreases the weight of the social inﬂuence reward overC\nsteps (C∈ [0.2−3.5]×108); this sometimes leads to a slight\ndelay before the inﬂuence models’ performance improves.\nAs is evident in Figures 1a and 1b, introducing an awareness\nof other agents’ actions helps, but having the social inﬂuence\nreward eventually leads to signiﬁcantly higher collective\nreward in both games. Due to the structure of the SSD games,\nwe can infer that agents that obtain higher collective reward\nlearned to cooperate more effectively. In theHarvest MARL\n\n<!-- page: 4 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nsetting, it is clear that the inﬂuence reward is essential to\nachieve any reasonable learning.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 1: Total collective reward obtained in Experiment 1.\nAgents trained with inﬂuence (red) signiﬁcantly outperform\nthe baseline and ablated agents. In Harvest, the inﬂuence\nreward is essential to achieve any meaningful learning.\nTo understand how social inﬂuence helps agents achieve\ncooperative behavior, we investigated the trajectories\nproduced by high scoring models in both Cleanup and\nHarvest; the analysis revealed interesting behavior.\nAs an example, in the Cleanup video available here:\nhttps://youtu.be/iH_V5WKQxmo a single agent\n(shown in purple) was trained with the social inﬂuence\nreward. Unlike the other agents, which continue to move\nand explore randomly while waiting for apples to spawn,\nthe inﬂuencer only traverses the map when it is pursuing an\napple, then stops. The rest of the time it stays still.\nFigure 2: A moment\nof high inﬂuence when\nthe purple inﬂuencer sig-\nnals the presence of\nan apple (green tiles)\noutside the yellow in-\nﬂuencee’s ﬁeld-of-view\n(yellow outlined box).\nFigure 2 shows a moment of\nhigh inﬂuence between the in-\nﬂuencer and the yellow inﬂu-\nencee. The inﬂuencer has cho-\nsen to move towards an ap-\nple that is outside of the ego-\ncentric ﬁeld-of-view of the yel-\nlow agent. Because the inﬂu-\nencer only moves when apples\nare available, this signals to the\nyellow agent that an apple must\nbe present above it which it\ncannot see. This changes the\nyellow agent’s distribution over\nits planned action,p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt ),\nand allows the purple agent to\ngain inﬂuence. A similar mo-\nment occurs when the inﬂu-\nencer signals to an agent that has\nbeen cleaning the river that no\napples have appeared by staying\nstill (see Figure 14 in the Sup-\nplementary Material).\nIn this case study, the inﬂuencer agent learned to use its own\nactions as a binary code which signals the presence or absence\nof apples in the environment. We observe a similar effect in\nHarvest. This type of action-based communication could be\nlikened to the bee waggle dance discovered by von Frisch\n(1969). Evidently, the inﬂuence reward gave rise not only to\ncooperative behavior, but to emergent communication.\nIt is important to consider the limitations of the inﬂuence\nreward. Whether it will always give rise to cooperative be-\nhavior may depend on the speciﬁcs of the environment and\ntask, and tuning the trade-off between environmental and\ninﬂuence reward. Although inﬂuence is arguably necessary\nfor coordination (e.g. two agents coordinating to manipulate\nan object must have a high degree of inﬂuence between their\nactions), it may be possible to inﬂuence another agent in a\nnon-cooperative way. The results provided here show that the\ninﬂuence reward did lead to increased cooperation, in spite of\ncooperation being difﬁcult to achieve in these environments.\n5. Inﬂuential Communication\nGiven the above results, we next experiment with using the\ninﬂuence reward to train agents to use an explicit commu-\nnication channel. We take some inspiration from research\ndrawing a connection between inﬂuence and communication\nin human learning. According to Melis & Semmann (2010),\nhuman children rapidly learn to use communication to inﬂu-\nence the behavior of others when engaging in cooperative\nactivities. They explain that “this ability to inﬂuence the\npartner via communication has been interpreted as evidence\nfor a capacity to form shared goals with others”, and that this\ncapacity may be “what allows humans to engage in a wide\nrange of cooperative activities”.\nThus, we equip agents with an explicit communication chan-\nnel, similar to the approach used by Foerster et al. (2016).\nAt each timestep, each agentk chooses a discrete commu-\nnication symbolmk\nt ; these symbols are concatenated into\na combined message vector mt = [m0\nt,m1\nt...mN\nt ], for N\nagents. This message vector mt is then given as input to\nevery other agent in the next timestep. Note that previous\nwork has shown that self-interested agents do not learn to use\nthis type of ungrounded, cheap talk communication chan-\nnel effectively (Crawford & Sobel, 1982; Cao et al., 2018;\nFoerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou et al., 2018).\nTo train the agents to communicate, we augment our initial\nnetwork with an additional A3C output head, that learns a\ncommunication policyπm and value functionVm to deter-\nmine which symbol to emit (see Figure 3). The normal policy\nand value function used for acting in the environment,πe and\nVe, are trained only with environmental rewarde. We use\nthe inﬂuence reward as an additional incentive for training\nthe communication policy,πm, such thatr =αe+βc. Coun-\nterfactuals are employed to assess how much inﬂuence an\nagent’s communication message from the previous timestep,\n\n<!-- page: 5 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nFigure 3: The communication model has two heads, which\nlearn the environment policy,πe, and a policy for emitting\ncommunication symbols,πm. Other agents’ communication\nmessages mt−1 are input to the LSTM.\nmk\nt−1, has on another agent’s action,aj\nt, where:\nck\nt =\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|mk\nt−1,sj\nt )\np(aj\nt|sj\nt )]\n]\n(2)\nImportantly, rewarding inﬂuence through a communication\nchannel does not suffer from the limitation mentioned in the\nprevious section, i.e. that it may be possible to inﬂuence\nanother agent in a non-cooperative way. We can see this\nfor two reasons. First, there is nothing that compels agent\nj to act based on agentk’s communication message; ifmk\nt\ndoes not contain valuable information,j is free to ignore it.\nSecond, becausej’s action policyπe is trained only with en-\nvironmental reward,j will only change its intended action as\na result of observingmk\nt (i.e. be inﬂuenced bymk\nt ) if it con-\ntains information that helpsj to obtain environmental reward.\nTherefore, we hypothesize that inﬂuential communication\nmust provide useful information to the listener.\n5.1. Experiment II: Inﬂuential Communication\nFigure 4 shows the collective reward obtained when training\nthe agents to use an explicit communication channel. Here,\nthe ablated model has the same structure as in Figure 3, but\nthe communication policyπm is trained only with environ-\nmental reward. We observe that the agents incentivized to\ncommunicate via the social inﬂuence reward learn faster, and\nachieve signiﬁcantly higher collective reward for the majority\nof training in both games. In fact, in the case ofCleanup, we\nfound thatα = 0in the optimal hyperparameter setting, mean-\ning that it was most effective to train the communication head\nwith zero extrinsic reward (see Table 2 in the Supplementary\nMaterial). This suggests that inﬂuence alone can be a suf-\nﬁcient mechanism for training an effective communication\npolicy. In Harvest, once again inﬂuence is critical to allow\nagents to learn coordinated policies and attain high reward.\nTo analyze the communication behaviour learned by the\nagents, we introduce three metrics, partially inspired by\n(Bogin et al., 2018). Speaker consistency, is a normalized\nscore∈ [0,1] which assesses the entropy ofp(ak|mk) and\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 4: Total collective reward for deep RL agents with\ncommunication channels. Once again, the inﬂuence reward\nis essential to improve or achieve any learning.\np(mk|ak) to determine how consistently a speaker agent\nemits a particular symbol when it takes a particular action,\nand vice versa (the formula is given in the Supplementary\nMaterial Section 10.4.4). We expect this measure to be\nhigh if, for example, the speaker always emits the same\nsymbol when it is cleaning the river. We also introduce\ntwo measures of instantaneous coordination (IC), which\nare both measures of mutual information (MI): (1) sym-\nbol/action IC =I(mk\nt ;aj\nt+1) measures the MI between the in-\nﬂuencer/speaker’s symbol and the inﬂuencee/listener’s next\naction, and (2) action/action IC=I(ak\nt ;aj\nt+1) measures the\nMI between the inﬂuencer’s action and the inﬂuencee’s next\naction. To compute these measures we ﬁrst average over all\ntrajectory steps, then take the maximum value between any\ntwo agents, to determine if any pair of agents are coordinat-\ning. Note that these measures are allinstantaneous, as they\nconsider only short-term dependencies across two consecu-\ntive timesteps, and cannot capture if an agent communicates\ninﬂuential compositional messages, i.e. information that re-\nquires several consecutive symbols to transmit and only then\naffects the other agents behavior.\nFigure 5: Metrics describing the quality of learned com-\nmunication protocols. The models trained with inﬂuence\nreward exhibit more consistent communication and more\ncoordination, especially in moments where inﬂuence is high.\nFigure 5 presents the results. The speaker consistencies\nmetric reveals that inﬂuence agents more unambiguously\ncommunicate about their own actions than baseline agents,\nindicating that the emergent communication is more mean-\ningful. The IC metrics demonstrate that baseline agents\nshow almost no signs of co-ordinating behavior with com-\nmunication, i.e. speakers saying A and listeners doing B\nconsistently. This result is aligned with both theoretical re-\n\n<!-- page: 6 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nsults in cheap-talk literature (Crawford & Sobel, 1982), and\nrecent empirical results in MARL (e.g. Foerster et al. (2016);\nLazaridou et al. (2018); Cao et al. (2018)).\nIn contrast, we do see high IC between inﬂuence agents,\nbut only when we limit the analysis to timesteps on which\ninﬂuence was greater than or equal to the mean inﬂuence\n(cf. inﬂuential moments in Figure 5). Inspecting the results\nreveals a common pattern: inﬂuence is sparse in time. An\nagent’s inﬂuence is only greater than its mean inﬂuence in\nless than 10% of timesteps. Because the listener agent is\nnot compelled to listen to any given speaker, listeners se-\nlectively listen to a speaker only when it is beneﬁcial, and\ninﬂuence cannot occur all the time. Only when the listener\ndecides to change its action based on the speaker’s message\ndoes inﬂuence occur, and in these moments we observe high\nI(mk\nt ;aj\nt+1). It appears the inﬂuencers have learned a strat-\negy of communicating meaningful information about their\nown actions, and gaining inﬂuence when this becomes rele-\nvant enough for the listener to act on it.\nExamining the relationship between the degree to which\nagents were inﬂuenced by communication and the reward\nthey obtained gives a compelling result: agents that are the\nmost inﬂuenced also achieve higher individual environmental\nreward. We sampled 100 different experimental conditions\n(i.e., hyper-parameters and random seeds) for both games,\nand normalized and correlated the inﬂuence and individual\nrewards. We found that agents who are more often inﬂuenced\ntend to achieve higher task reward in bothCleanup,ρ =.67,\np<0.001, and Harvest, ρ =.34, p<0.001. This supports\nthe hypothesis that in order to inﬂuence another agent via\ncommunication, the communication message should contain\ninformation that helps the listener maximize its own environ-\nmental reward. Since better listeners/inﬂuencees are more\nsuccessful in terms of task reward, we have evidence that\nuseful information was transmitted to them.\nThis result is promising, but may depend on the speciﬁc ex-\nperimental approach taken here, in which agents interact\nwith each other repeatedly. In this case, there is no advantage\nto the speaker for communicating unreliable information\n(i.e. lying), because it would lose inﬂuence with the listener\nover time. This may not be guaranteed in one-shot interac-\ntions. However, given repeated interactions, the above results\nprovide empirical evidence that social inﬂuence as intrinsic\nmotivation allows agents to learn meaningful communication\nprotocols when this is otherwise not possible.\n6. Modeling Other Agents\nComputing the causal inﬂuence reward as introduced in Sec-\ntion 4 requires knowing the probability of another agent’s\naction given a counterfactual, which we previously solved\nby using a centralized training approach in which agents\ncould access other agents’ policy networks. While using a\ncentralized training framework is common in MARL (e.g.\nFoerster et al. (2017; 2016)), it is less realistic than a scenario\nin which each agent is trained independently. We can relax\nthis assumption and achieve independent training by equip-\nping each agent with its own internalModel of Other Agents\n(MOA). The MOA consists of a second set of fully-connected\nand LSTM layers connected to the agent’s convolutional layer\n(see Figure 6), and is trained to predict all other agents’ next\nactions given their previous actions, and the agent’s egocen-\ntric view of the state:p(at+1|at,sk\nt ). The MOA is trained\nusing observed action trajectories and cross-entropy loss.\nFigure 6: The Model of Other Agents (MOA) architecture\nlearns both an RL policy πe, and a supervised model that\npredicts the actions of other agents, at+1. The supervised\nmodel is used for internally computing the inﬂuence reward.\nA trained MOA can be used to compute the social inﬂuence\nreward in the following way. Each agent can “imagine” coun-\nterfactual actions that it could have taken at each timestep,\nand use its internal MOA to predict the effect on other agents.\nIt can then give itself reward for taking actions that it esti-\nmates were the most inﬂuential. This has an intuitive appeal,\nbecause it resembles how humans reason about their effect\non others (Ferguson et al., 2010). We often ﬁnd ourselves\nasking counterfactual questions of the form, “How would she\nhave acted if I had done something else in that situation?”,\nwhich we answer using our internal model of others.\nLearning a model ofp(aj\nt+1|ak\nt,sk\nt ) requires implicitly mod-\neling both other agents’ internal states and behavior, as well\nas the environment transition function. If the model is inaccu-\nrate, this would lead to noisy estimates of the causal inﬂuence\nreward. To compensate for this, We only give the inﬂuence\nreward to an agent (k) when the agent it is attempting to inﬂu-\nence (j) is within its ﬁeld-of-view, because the estimates of\np(aj\nt+1|ak\nt,sk\nt ) are more accurate whenj is visible tok.2 This\nconstraint could have the side-effect of encouraging agents to\nstay in closer proximity. However, an intrinsic social reward\nencouraging proximity is reasonable given that humans seek\nafﬁliation and to spend time near other people (Tomasello,\n2This contrasts with our previous models in which the inﬂuence\nreward was obtained even from non-visible agents.\n\n<!-- page: 7 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n2009).\n6.1. Experiment III: Modeling Other Agents\nAs before, we allow the policy LSTM of each agent to condi-\ntion on the actions of other agents in the last timestep (actions\nare visible). We compare against an ablated version of the\narchitecture shown in Figure 6, which does not use the output\nof the MOA to compute a reward; rather, the MOA can be\nthought of as an unsupervised auxiliary task that may help the\nmodel to learn a better shared embedding layer, encouraging\nit to encode information relevant to predicting other agents’\nbehavior. Figure 7 shows the collective reward obtained for\nagents trained with a MOA module. While we see that the\nauxiliary task does help to improve reward over the A3C base-\nline, the inﬂuence agent gets consistently higher collective\nreward. These results demonstrate that the inﬂuence reward\ncan be effectively computed using an internal MOA, and thus\nagents can learn socially but independently, optimizing for a\nsocial reward without a centralized controller.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 7: Total collective reward for MOA models. Again,\nintrinsic inﬂuence consistently improves learning, with the\npowerful A3C agent baselines not being able to learn.\nAgents with inﬂuence achieve higher collective reward than\nthe previous state-of-the-art for these environments (275 for\nCleanup and 750 for Harvest) (Hughes et al., 2018). This is\ncompelling, given that previous work relied on the assump-\ntion that agents could view one another’s rewards; we make\nno such assumption, instead relying only on agents viewing\neach other’s actions. Table 4 of the Supplementary Material\ngives the ﬁnal collective reward obtained in previous work,\nand by each inﬂuence model for all three experiments.\n7. Related work\nSeveral attempts have been made to develop intrinsic social\nrewards.3 Sequeira et al. (2011) developed hand-crafted re-\nwards for a foraging environment, in which agents were pun-\nished for eating more than their fair share of food. Another\napproach gave agents an emotional intrinsic reward based\non their perception of their neighbours’ cooperativeness in\na networked version of the iterated prisoner’s dilemma, but\nis limited to scenarios in which it is possible to directly clas-\n3Note that intrinsic is not a synonym ofinternal; other people\ncan be intrinsically motivating (Stavropoulos & Carver, 2013).\nsify each action as cooperative or non-cooperative (Yu et al.,\n2013). This is untenable in complex settings with long-term\nstrategies, such as the SSDs under investigation here.\nSome approaches allow agents to view each others’ rewards\nin order to optimize for collective reward. Peysakhovich &\nLerer (2018) show that if even a single agent is trained to op-\ntimize for others’ rewards, it can signiﬁcantly help the group.\nHughes et al. (2018) introduced an inequity aversion moti-\nvation, which penalized agents if their rewards differed too\nmuch from those of the group. Liu et al. (2014) train agents\nto learn their own optimal reward function in a cooperative,\nmulti-agent setting with known group reward. However, the\nassumption that agents can view and optimize for each oth-\ners’ rewards may be unrealistic. Thus, recent work explores\ntraining agents that learn when to cooperate based solely on\ntheir own past rewards (Peysakhovich & Lerer, 2017).\nTraining agents to learn emergent communication protocols\nhas been explored (Foerster et al., 2016; Cao et al., 2018; Choi\net al., 2018; Lazaridou et al., 2018; Bogin et al., 2018), with\nmany authors ﬁnding that selﬁsh agents do not learn to use an\nungrounded, cheap talk communication channel effectively.\nCrawford & Sobel (1982) ﬁnd that in theory, the information\ncommunicated is proportional to the amount of common\ninterest; thus, as agents’ interests diverge, no communication\nis to be expected. And while communication can emerge\nwhen agents are prosocial (Foerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou\net al., 2018), curious (Oudeyer & Kaplan, 2006; Oudeyer &\nSmith, 2016; Forestier & Oudeyer, 2017), or hand-crafted\n(Crandall et al., 2017), self-interested agents do not to learn\nto communicate (Cao et al., 2018). We have shown that\nthe social inﬂuence reward can encourage agents to learn to\ncommunicate more effectively in complex environments.\nOur MOA is related to work on machine theory of mind\n(Rabinowitz et al., 2018), which demonstrated that a model\ntrained to predict agents’ actions can model false beliefs.\nLOLA agents model the impact of their policy on the param-\neter updates of other agents, and directly incorporate this into\nthe agent’s own learning rule (Foerster et al., 2018).\nBarton et al. (2018) propose causal inﬂuence as a way to mea-\nsure coordination between agents, speciﬁcally using Con-\nvergence Cross Mapping (CCM) to analyze the degree of\ndependence between two agents’ policies. The limitation\nif CCM is that estimates of causality are known to degrade\nin the presence of stochastic effects (Tajima et al., 2015).\nCounterfactual reasoning has also been used in a multi-agent\nsetting, to marginalize out the effect of one agent on a pre-\ndicted global value function estimating collective reward, and\nthus obtain an improved baseline for computing each agent’s\nadvantage function (Foerster et al., 2017). A similar paper\nshows that counterfactuals can be used with potential-based\nreward shaping to improve credit assignment for training a\njoint policy in multi-agent RL (Devlin et al., 2014). However,\n\n<!-- page: 8 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nonce again these approaches rely on a centralized controller.\nMutual information (MI) has been explored as a tool for de-\nsigning social rewards. Strouse et al. (2018) train agents to\noptimize the MI between their actions and a categorical goal,\nas a way to signal or hide the agent’s intentions. However, this\napproach depends on agents pursuing a known, categorical\ngoal. Guckelsberger et al. (2018), in pursuit of the ultimate\nvideo game adversary, develop an agent that maximizes its\nempowerment, minimizes the player’s empowerment, and\nmaximizes its empowerment over the player’s next state.\nThis third goal, termedtransfer empowerment, is obtained\nby maximizing the MI between the agent’s actions and the\nplayer’s future state. While a social form of empowerment,\nthe authors ﬁnd that agents trained with transfer empower-\nment simply tend to stay near the player. Further, the agents\nare not trained with RL, but rather analytically compute these\nmeasures in simple grid-world environments. As such, the\nagent cannot learn to model other agents or the environment.\nGiven the social inﬂuence reward incentivizes maximizing\nthe mutual information between agents’ actions, our work\nalso has ties to the literature on empowerment, in which\nagents maximize the mutual information between their ac-\ntions and their future state (Klyubin et al., 2005; Mohamed &\nRezende, 2015). Thus, our proposed reward can be seen as a\nnovel social form of empowerment.\n8. Details on Causal Inference\nThe causal inﬂuence reward presented in Eq. 4 is assessed\nusing counterfactual reasoning. Unlike ado-calculus inter-\nvention (which estimates the general expected causal effect\nof one variable on another), a counterfactual involves condi-\ntioning on a set of variables observed in a given situation and\nasking how would the outcome have changed if some vari-\nable were different, and all other variables remained the same\n(Pearl et al., 2016). This type of inquiry allows us to measure\nthe precise causal effect of agentk’s action at timestept,ak\nt ,\non agentj’s action,aj\nt, in the speciﬁc environment statest,\nproviding a richer and less sparse reward for agentk. Com-\nputing counterfactuals requires conditioning on the correct\nset of observed variables to ensure there are no confounds.\nIn our case, the conditioning set must include not only an\nagent’s partially observed view of the environment state,sj\nt,\nbut also the agent’s internal LSTM stateuj\nt, to remove any\ndependency on previous timesteps in the trajectory. Thus, the\nbasic causal inﬂuence reward can be more accurately written:\nck\nt =\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt,uj\nt )||p(aj\nt|sj\nt,uj\nt )]\n]\n. (3)\nFigure 8 shows the causal diagrams for computing the inﬂu-\nence reward in both the basic case (8a) and the MOA case (8b).\nBecause basic inﬂuence looks at inﬂuence between agents’\nactions in the same timestep, the diagram is much simpler.\nHowever, to avoid circular dependencies in the graph, it re-\nquires that agentk choose its action beforej, and therefore\nk can inﬂuencej butj cannot inﬂuencek. If there are more\nthan two agents, we assume a disjoint set of inﬂuencer and\ninﬂuencee agents, and all inﬂuencers must act ﬁrst.\n(a) Basic\n (b) MOA\nFigure 8: Causal diagrams of agentk’s effect onj’s action.\nShaded nodes are conditioned on, and we intervene onak\nt\n(blue node) by replacing it with counterfactuals. Nodes with\na green background must be modeled using the MOA module.\nNote that there is no backdoor path betweenak\nt andst in the\nMOA case, since it would require traversing a collider that is\nnot in the conditioning set.\nComputing inﬂuence across timesteps, as in the communica-\ntion and MOA experiments, complicates the causal diagram,\nbut ensures that each agent can inﬂuence every other agent.\nFigure 8b shows the diagram in the MOA case, in which we\ncan isolate the causal effect ofak\nt onaj\nt+1 because the back-\ndoor path throughst is blocked by the collider nodes atst+1\nanduj\nt+1 (Pearl et al., 2016). Note that it would be sufﬁcient\nto condition only onsk\nt in order to block all back-door paths\nin this case, but we show⟨uk\nt,sk\nt,aj\nt⟩ as shaded because all of\nthese are given as inputs to the MOA to help it predictaj\nt+1.\nFor the MOA to accurately estimatep(aj\nt+1|ak\nt,sk\nt ), it must\nmodel both the environment transition functionT , as well as\naspects of the internal LSTM state of the other agent,uj\nt+1,\nas shown by the shaded green variables in Figure 8b.\nThis is a simple case of counterfactual reasoning, that does\nnot require using abduction to update the probability of any\nunobserved variables (Pearl, 2013). This is because we have\nbuilt all relevant models, know all of their inputs, and can\neasily store the values for those variables at every step of the\ntrajectory in order to condition on them so that there are no\nunobserved variables that could act as a confounder.\n9. Conclusions and Future Work\nAll three experiments have shown that the proposed intrinsic\nsocial inﬂuence reward consistently leads to higher collec-\ntive return. Despite variation in the tasks, hyper-parameters,\nneural network architectures and experimental setups, the\nlearning curves for agents trained with the inﬂuence reward\n\n<!-- page: 9 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nare signiﬁcantly better than the curves of powerful agents\nsuch as A3C and their improved baselines. In some cases,\nit is clear that inﬂuence is essential to achieve any form of\nlearning, attesting to the promise of this idea and highlight-\ning the complexity of learning general deep neural network\nmulti-agent policies.\nExperiment I also showed that the inﬂuence reward can lead\nto the emergence of communication protocols. In experiment\nII, which included an explicit communication channel, we\nsaw that inﬂuence improved communication. Experiment\nIII showed that inﬂuence can be computed by augmenting\nagents with an internal model of other agents. The inﬂu-\nence reward can thus be computed without having access to\nanother agent’s reward function, or requiring a centralized\ncontroller. We were able to surpass state-of-the-art perfor-\nmance on the SSDs studied here, despite the fact that previous\nwork relied on agents’ ability to view other agents’ rewards.\nUsing counterfactuals to allow agents to understand the ef-\nfects of their actions on others is a promising approach with\nmany extensions. Agents could use counterfactuals to de-\nvelop a form of ‘empathy’, by simulating how their actions\naffect another agent’s value function. Inﬂuence could also\nbe used to drive coordinated behavior in robots attempting to\ndo cooperative manipulation and control tasks. Finally, if we\nview multi-agent networks as single agents, inﬂuence could\nbe used as a regularizer to encourage different modules of the\nnetwork to integrate information from other networks; for\nexample, to hopefully prevent collapse in hierarchical RL.\nAcknowledgements\nWe are grateful to Eugene Vinitsky for his help in reproduc-\ning the SSD environments in open source to improve the\nreplicability of the paper. We also thank Steven Wheelwright,\nNeil Rabinowitz, Thore Graepel, Alexander Novikov, Scott\nReed, Pedro Mediano, Jane Wang, Max Kleiman-Weiner, An-\ndrea Tacchetti, Kevin McKee, Yannick Schroecker, Matthias\nBauer, David Rolnick, Francis Song, David Budden, and\nCsaba Szepesvari, as well as everyone on the DeepMind\nMachine Learning and Multi-Agent teams for their helpful\ndiscussions and support.\nReferences\nBarton, S. L., Waytowich, N. R., Zaroukian, E., and\nAsher, D. E. Measuring collaborative emergent behav-\nior in multi-agent reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint\narXiv:1807.08663, 2018.\nBogin, B., Geva, M., and Berant, J. Emergence of commu-\nnication in an interactive world with consistent speakers.\narXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00549, 2018.\nCao, K., Lazaridou, A., Lanctot, M., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K.,\nand Clark, S. Emergent communication through negotia-\ntion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03980, 2018.\nCapdepuy, P., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. L. Maximization\nof potential information ﬂow as a universal utility for col-\nlective behaviour. InArtiﬁcial Life, 2007. ALIFE’07. IEEE\nSymposium on, pp. 207–213. Ieee, 2007.\nChoi, E., Lazaridou, A., and de Freitas, N. Compositional\nobverter communication learning from raw visual input.\narXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02341, 2018.\nCrandall, J. W., Oudah, M., Chenlinangjia, T., Ishowo-\nOloko, F., Abdallah, S., Bonnefon, J., Cebri´an, M., Shar-\niff, A., Goodrich, M. A., and Rahwan, I. Cooperating\nwith machines. CoRR, abs/1703.06207, 2017. URL\nhttp://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06207.\nCrawford, V . P. and Sobel, J. Strategic information transmis-\nsion. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,\npp. 1431–1451, 1982.\nDevlin, S., Yliniemi, L., Kudenko, D., and Tumer, K.\nPotential-based difference rewards for multiagent rein-\nforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2014 interna-\ntional conference on Autonomous agents and multi-agent\nsystems, pp. 165–172. International Foundation for Au-\ntonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2014.\nFerguson, H. J., Scheepers, C., and Sanford, A. J. Ex-\npectations in counterfactual and theory of mind reason-\ning. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(3):297–346,\n2010. doi: 10.1080/01690960903041174. URL https:\n//doi.org/10.1080/01690960903041174.\nFoerster, J., Assael, I. A., de Freitas, N., and Whiteson, S.\nLearning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforce-\nment learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-\ncessing Systems, pp. 2137–2145, 2016.\nFoerster, J., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and\nWhiteson, S. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients.\narXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08926, 2017.\nFoerster, J., Chen, R. Y ., Al-Shedivat, M., Whiteson, S.,\nAbbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. Learning with opponent-\nlearning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-\ntional Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent\nSystems, pp. 122–130. International Foundation for Au-\ntonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018.\nForestier, S. and Oudeyer, P.-Y . A uniﬁed model of speech\nand tool use early development. In 39th Annual Con-\nference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2017),\n2017.\nGers, F. A., Schmidhuber, J., and Cummins, F. Learning to\nforget: Continual prediction with lstm. 1999.\n\n<!-- page: 10 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nGuckelsberger, C., Salge, C., and Togelius, J. New\nand surprising ways to be mean. adversarial npcs with\ncoupled empowerment minimisation. arXiv preprint\narXiv:1806.01387, 2018.\nHarari, Y . N.Sapiens: A brief history of humankind. Random\nHouse, 2014.\nHenrich, J. The Secret of Our Success: How culture is driving\nhuman evolution, domesticating our species, and making\nus smart. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2015.\nURL http://press.princeton.edu/titles/\n10543.html.\nHerrmann, E., Call, J., Hern `andez-Lloreda, M. V ., Hare,\nB., and Tomasello, M. Humans have evolved spe-\ncialized skills of social cognition: The cultural intel-\nligence hypothesis. Science, 317(5843):1360–1366,\n2007. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.\n1146282. URL http://science.sciencemag.\norg/content/317/5843/1360.\nHughes, E., Leibo, J. Z., Phillips, M. G., Tuyls, K., Du´e˜nez-\nGuzm´an, E. A., Casta ˜neda, A. G., Dunning, I., Zhu, T.,\nMcKee, K. R., Koster, R., et al. Inequity aversion improves\ncooperation in intertemporal social dilemmas. InAdvances\nin neural information processing systems (NIPS), Mon-\ntreal, Canada, 2018.\nKlyubin, A. S., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. L. Empowerment:\nA universal agent-centric measure of control. In Evolu-\ntionary Computation, 2005. The 2005 IEEE Congress on,\nvolume 1, pp. 128–135. IEEE, 2005.\nLaland, K. N. Darwin’s unﬁnished symphony : how cul-\nture made the human mind / Kevin N. Laland. Princeton\nUniversity Press Princeton, 2017. ISBN 9781400884872\n140088487.\nLazaridou, A., Hermann, K. M., Tuyls, K., and Clark, S.\nEmergence of linguistic communication from referential\ngames with symbolic and pixel input. arXiv preprint\narXiv:1804.03984, 2018.\nLeibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V ., Lanctot, M., Marecki, J., and Grae-\npel, T. Multi-agent reinforcement learning in sequential\nsocial dilemmas. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference\non Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 464–\n473. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and\nMultiagent Systems, 2017.\nLiu, B., Singh, S., Lewis, R. L., and Qin, S. Optimal rewards\nfor cooperative agents.IEEE Transactions on Autonomous\nMental Development, 6(4):286–297, 2014.\nLizier, J. T. and Prokopenko, M. Differentiating information\ntransfer and causal effect. The European Physical Journal\nB, 73(4):605–615, 2010.\nLowe, R., Wu, Y ., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, O. P., and Mor-\ndatch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-\ncompetitive environments. In Advances in Neural Infor-\nmation Processing Systems, pp. 6379–6390, 2017.\nMelis, A. P. and Semmann, D. How is human cooperation\ndifferent? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\nof London B: Biological Sciences, 365(1553):2663–2674,\n2010.\nMnih, V ., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T.,\nHarley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous\nmethods for deep reinforcement learning. InInternational\nconference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937, 2016.\nMohamed, S. and Rezende, D. J. Variational information\nmaximisation for intrinsically motivated reinforcement\nlearning. In Advances in neural information processing\nsystems, pp. 2125–2133, 2015.\nOudeyer, P.-Y . and Kaplan, F. Discovering communication.\nConnection Science, 18(2):189–206, 2006.\nOudeyer, P.-Y . and Smith, L. B. How evolution may work\nthrough curiosity-driven developmental process.Topics\nin Cognitive Science, 8(2):492–502, 2016.\nPathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T.\nCuriosity-driven exploration by self-supervised predic-\ntion. In International Conference on Machine Learning\n(ICML), volume 2017, 2017.\nPearl, J. Structural counterfactuals: A brief introduction.\nCognitive science, 37(6):977–985, 2013.\nPearl, J., Glymour, M., and Jewell, N. P.Causal inference in\nstatistics: a primer. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.\nPerolat, J., Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V ., Beattie, C., Tuyls,\nK., and Graepel, T. A multi-agent reinforcement learn-\ning model of common-pool resource appropriation. In\nAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.\n3643–3652, 2017.\nPeysakhovich, A. and Lerer, A. Consequentialist conditional\ncooperation in social dilemmas with imperfect informa-\ntion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06975, 2017.\nPeysakhovich, A. and Lerer, A. Prosocial learning agents\nsolve generalized stag hunts better than selﬁsh ones. In\nProceedings of the 17th International Conference on Au-\ntonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 2043–2044.\nInternational Foundation for Autonomous Agents and\nMultiagent Systems, 2018.\nRabinowitz, N. C., Perbet, F., Song, H. F., Zhang, C., Eslami,\nS., and Botvinick, M. Machine theory of mind. arXiv\npreprint arXiv:1802.07740, 2018.\n\n<!-- page: 11 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nSchelling, T. C. Hockey helmets, concealed weapons, and\ndaylight saving: A study of binary choices with exter-\nnalities. Journal of Conﬂict resolution, 17(3):381–428,\n1973.\nSchmidhuber, J. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and in-\ntrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Transactions on\nAutonomous Mental Development, 2(3):230–247, 2010.\nSequeira, P., Melo, F. S., Prada, R., and Paiva, A. Emerging\nsocial awareness: Exploring intrinsic motivation in mul-\ntiagent learning. In Development and Learning (ICDL),\n2011 IEEE International Conference on, volume 2, pp.\n1–6. IEEE, 2011.\nSingh, S. P., Barto, A. G., and Chentanez, N. Intrinsically\nmotivated reinforcement learning. InAdvances in Neural\nInformation Processing Systems 17 [Neural Information\nProcessing Systems, NIPS 2004, December 13-18, 2004,\nVancouver, British Columbia, Canada], pp. 1281–1288,\n2004.\nStavropoulos, K. K. and Carver, L. J. Research review: social\nmotivation and oxytocin in autism–implications for joint\nattention development and intervention.Journal of Child\nPsychology and Psychiatry, 54(6):603–618, 2013.\nStrouse, D., Kleiman-Weiner, M., Tenenbaum, J., Botvinick,\nM., and Schwab, D. Learning to share and hide inten-\ntions using information regularization. arXiv preprint\narXiv:1808.02093, 2018.\nTajima, S., Yanagawa, T., Fujii, N., and Toyoizumi, T.\nUntangling brain-wide dynamics in consciousness by\ncross-embedding. PLoS computational biology, 11(11):\ne1004537, 2015.\nTomasello, M. Why we cooperate. MIT press, 2009.\nvan Schaik, C. P. and Burkart, J. M. Social learning and evo-\nlution: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. Philosophical\nTransactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,\n366(1567):1008–1016, 2011.\nvon Frisch, K. The dance language and orientation of bees.\n5, 06 1969.\nYu, C., Zhang, M., and Ren, F. Emotional multiagent rein-\nforcement learning in social dilemmas. InInternational\nConference on Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent\nSystems, pp. 372–387. Springer, 2013.\n10. Supplementary Material\n10.1. Inﬂuence as Mutual Information\nThe causal inﬂuence of agentk on agentj is:\nDKL\n[\np(aj\nt|ak\nt,zt)\np(aj\nt|zt)\n]\n, (4)\nwherezt represents all relevantu ands background variables\nat timestept. The inﬂuence reward to the mutual information\n(MI) between the actions of agentsk andj, which is given by\nI(Aj;Ak|z) =\n∑\nak,aj\np(aj,ak|z)log p(aj,ak|z)\np(aj|z)p(ak|z)\n=\n∑\nak\np(ak|z)DKL\n[\np(aj|ak,z)\np(aj|z)\n]\n, (5)\nwhere we see that the DKL factor in Eq. 5 is the causal\ninﬂuence reward given in Eq. 4.\nBy samplingN independent trajectoriesτn from the environ-\nment, wherek’s actionsak\nn are drawn according top(ak|z),\nwe perform a Monte-Carlo approximation of the MI (see e.g.\nStrouse et al. (2018)),\nI(Ak;Aj|z) =Eτ\n[\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|Ak,z)\np(Aj|z)\n]⏐⏐⏐z\n]\n≈ 1\nN\n∑\nn\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|ak\nn,z)\np(Aj|z)\n]\n. (6)\nThus, in expectation, the social inﬂuence reward is the MI\nbetween agents’ actions.\nWhether the policy trained with Eq. 4 actually learns to ap-\nproximate the MI depends on the learning dynamics. We\ncalculate the intrinsic social inﬂuence reward using Eq. 4, be-\ncause unlike Eq. 5, which gives an estimate of the symmetric\nbandwidth betweenk andj, Eq. 4 gives the directed causal\neffect of the speciﬁc action taken by agentk,ak\nt . We believe\nthis will result in an easier reward to learn, since it allows for\nbetter credit assignment; agentk can more easily learn which\nof its actions lead to high inﬂuence.\nThe connection to mutual information is interesting, because\na frequently used intrinsic motivation for single agent RL\nis empowerment, which rewards the agent for having high\nmutual information between its actions and the future state\nof the environment (e.g. Klyubin et al. (2005); Capdepuy\net al. (2007)). To the extent that the social inﬂuence reward\napproximates the MI,k is rewarded for having empowerment\noverj’s actions.\nThe social inﬂuence reward can also be computed using\nother divergence measures besides KL-divergence. Lizier &\nProkopenko (2010) proposelocal information ﬂowas a mea-\nsure of direct causal effect; this is equivalent to thepointwise\nmutual information (the innermost term of Eq. 6), given by:\npmi(ak;aj|Z =z) = logp(aj|ak,z)\np(aj|z)\n= log p(ak,aj|z)\np(ak|z)p(aj|z). (7)\nThe PMI gives us a measure of inﬂuence of a single action of\nk on the single action taken byj. The expectation of the PMI\n\n<!-- page: 12 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\noverp(aj,ak|z) is the MI. We experiment with using the PMI\nand a number of divergence measures, including the Jensen-\nShannon Divergence (JSD), and ﬁnd that the inﬂuence reward\nis robust to the choice of measure.\n10.2. Sequential Social Dilemmas\nFigure 9 depicts the SSD games under investigation. In each\nof the games, an agent is rewarded +1 for every apple it\ncollects, but the apples are a limited resource. Agents have\nthe ability to punish each other with a ﬁning beam, which\ncosts−1 reward to ﬁre, and ﬁnes any agent it hits−50 reward.\nIn Cleanup (a public goods game) agents must clean a\nriver before apples can grow, but are not able to harvest\napples while cleaning. InHarvest (a common pool resource\ngame), apples respawn at a rate proportional to the amount\nof nearby apples; if apples are harvested too quickly, they\nwill not grow back. Both coordination, and cooperation\nare required to solve both games. In Cleanup, agents\nmust efﬁciently time harvesting apples and cleaning\nthe river, and allow agents cleaning the river a chance\nto consume apples. In Harvest, agents must spatially\ndistribute their harvesting, and abstain from consuming\napples too quickly in order to harvest sustainably. The\ncode for these games, including hyperparameter settings\nand apple and waste respawn probabilities, can be found\nat https://github.com/eugenevinitsky/\nsequential_social_dilemma_games.\nThe reward structure of the games is shown in Figure 10,\nwhich gives the Schelling diagram for both SSD tasks under\ninvestigation. A Schelling diagram (Schelling, 1973; Perolat\net al., 2017) depicts the relative payoffs for a single agent’s\nstrategy given a ﬁxed number of other agents who are coop-\nerative. These diagrams show that all agents would beneﬁt\nfrom learning to cooperate, because even the agents that are\nbeing exploited get higher reward than in the regime where\nall agents defect. However, traditional RL agents struggle to\nlearn to cooperate and solve these tasks effectively (Hughes\net al., 2018).\n10.3. Additional experiment - Box Trapped\nAs a proof-of-concept experiment to test whether the inﬂu-\nence reward works as expected, we constructed a special\nenvironment, shown in Figure 11. In this environment, one\nagent (teal) is trapped in a box. The other agent (purple) has\na special action it can use to open the box... or it can simply\nchoose to consume apples, which exist outside the box and\nare inexhaustible in this environment.\nAs expected, a vanilla A3C agent learns to act selﬁshly; the\npurple agent will simply consume apples, and chooses the\nopen box action in 0% of trajectories once the policy has con-\nverged. A video of A3C agents trained in this environment\nis available at: https://youtu.be/C8SE9_YKzxI,\nwhich shows that the purple agent leaves its compatriot\ntrapped in the box throughout the trajectory.\nIn contrast, an agent trained with the social inﬂuence re-\nward chooses the open box action in 88% of trajectories,\nreleasing its fellow agent so that they are both able to\nconsume apples. A video of this behavior is shown at:\nhttps://youtu.be/Gfo248-qt3c. Further, as Fig-\nure 12 reveals, the purple inﬂuencer agent usually chooses to\nopen the box within the ﬁrst few steps of the trajetory, giving\nits fellow agent more time to collect reward.\nMost importantly though, Figure 13 shows the inﬂuence\nreward over the course of a trajectory in the Box trapped\nenvironment. The agent chooses theopen box action in the\nsecond timestep; at this point, we see a corresponding spike\nin the inﬂuence reward. This reveals that the inﬂuence reward\nworks as expected, incentivizing an action which has a strong\n— and in this case, prosocial — effect on the other agent’s\nbehavior.\n10.4. Implementation details\nAll models are trained with a single convolutional layer with\na kernel of size 3, stride of size 1, and 6 output channels.\nThis is connected to two fully connected layers of size 32\neach, and an LSTM with 128 cells. We use a discount factor\nγ =.99. The number of agentsN is ﬁxed to 5.\nIn addition to the comparison function used to compute inﬂu-\nence (e.g. KL-divergence, PMI, JSD), there are many other\nhyperparameters that can be tuned for each model. We use a\nrandom search over hyperparameters, ensuring a fair compar-\nison with the search size over the baseline parameters that are\nshared with the inﬂuence models. For all models we search\nfor the optimal entropy reward and learning rate, where we\nanneal the learning rate from an initial value lr init to\nlr final. The below sections give the parameters found\nto be most effective for each of the three experiments.\n10.4.1. B ASIC INFLUENCE HYPERPARAMETERS\nIn this setting we vary the number of inﬂuencers from1−4,\nthe inﬂuence reward weightβ, and the number of curriculum\nsteps over which the weight of the inﬂuence reward is lin-\nearly increasedC. In this setting, since we have a centralised\ncontroller, we also experiment with giving the inﬂuence re-\nward to the agent being inﬂuenced as well, and ﬁnd that this\nsometimes helps. This ‘inﬂuencee’ reward is not used in the\nother two experiments, since it precludes independent train-\ning. The hyperparameters found to give the best performance\nfor each model are shown in Table 1.\n\n<!-- page: 13 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nFigure 9: The two SSD environments, Cleanup (left) and Harvest (right). Agents can exploit other agents for immediate\npayoff, but at the expense of the long-term collective reward of the group. Reproduced with permission from Hughes et al.\n(2018).\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 10: Schelling diagrams for the two social dilemma tasks show that an individual agent is motivated to defect, though\neveryone beneﬁts when more agents cooperate. Reproduced with permission from Hughes et al. (2018).\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .000248 .000687 .00184 .00025\nlr init .00126 .00126 .00107 .00136 .00215 .00107\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000042 .000028 .000013 .000042\nNumber of inﬂuencers - 3 1 - 3 3\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .146 - 0 .224\nCurriculumC - - 140 - - 140\nPolicy comparison - - JSD - - PMI\nInﬂuencee reward - - 1 - - 0\nTable 1: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the basic inﬂuence experiment.\nFigure 11: The Box trapped environment in which the teal\nagent is trapped, and the purple agent can release it with a\nspecial open box action.\n10.4.2. C OMMUNICATION HYPERPARAMETERS\nBecause the communication models have an extra A2C out-\nput head for the communication policy, we use an additional\nentropy regularization term just for this head, and apply a\nweight to the communication loss in the loss function. We\nalso vary the number of communication symbols that the\nagents can emit, and the size of the linear layer that connects\nthe LSTM to the communication policy layer, which we term\nthe communication embedding size. Finally, in the commu-\nnication regime, we experiment to setting the weight on the\nextrinsic reward E,α, to zero. The best hyperparameters for\neach of the communication models are shown in Table 2.\n10.4.3. M ODEL OF OTHER AGENTS (MOA)\nHYPERPARAMETERS\nThe MOA hyperparameters include whether to only train the\nMOA with cross-entropy loss on the actions of agents that\nare visible, and how much to weight the supervised loss in\nthe overall loss of the model. The best hyperparameters are\nshown in Table 3.\n\n<!-- page: 14 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nA3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nEntropy reg. .00176 .000249 .00305 .000687 .000174 .00220\nlr init .00126 .00223 .00249 .00136 .00137 .000413\nlr end .000012 .000022 .0000127 .000028 .0000127 .000049\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 2.752 - 0 4.825\nExtrinsic reward\nweightα - - 0 - - 1.0\nCurriculumC - - 1 - - 8\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nComm. entropy reg. - - .000789 - - .00208\nComm. loss weight - - .0758 - - .0709\nSymbol vocab size - - 9 - - 7\nComm. embedding - - 32 - - 16\nTable 2: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the communication experiment.\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nA3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .00176 .000687 .00495 .00223\nlr init .00126 .00123 .00123 .00136 .00206 .00120\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000012 .000028 .000022 .000044\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .620 - 0 2.521\nMOA loss weight - 1.312 15.007 - 1.711 10.911\nCurriculumC - - 40 - - 226\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nTrain MOA only\nwhen visible - False True - False True\nTable 3: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the model of other agents (MOA) experiment.\nFigure 12: Number of times the open box action occurs at\neach trajectory step over 100 trajectories.\nFigure 13: Inﬂuence reward over a trajectory inBox trapped.\nAn agent gets high inﬂuence for letting another agent out of\nthe box in which it is trapped.\n10.4.4. C OMMUNICATION ANALYSIS\nThe speaker consistency metric is calculated as:\nN∑\nk=1\n0.5[\n∑\nc\n1−H(p(ak|mk =c))\nHmax\n+\n∑\na\n1−H(p(mk|ak =a))\nHmax\n], (8)\n\n<!-- page: 15 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nwhereH is the entropy function andHmax is the maximum\nentropy based on the number of discrete symbols or actions.\nThe goal of the metric is to measure how much of a 1:1\ncorrespondence exists between a speaker’s action and the\nspeaker’s communication message.\n10.5. Additional results\n10.5.1. BASIC INFLUENCE EMERGENT COMMUNICATION\nFigure 14 shows an additional moment of high inﬂuence in\nthe Cleanup game. The purple inﬂuencer agent can see the\narea within the white box, and therefore all of the apple patch.\nThe ﬁeld-of-view of the magenta inﬂuencee is outlined with\nthe magenta box; it cannot see if apples have appeared, even\nthough it has been cleaning the river, which is the action re-\nquired to cause apples to appear. When the purple inﬂuencer\nturns left and does not move towards the apple patch, this\nsignals to the magenta agent that no apples have appeared,\nsince otherwise the inﬂuence would move right.\nFigure 14: A moment of high inﬂuence between the purple\ninﬂuencer and magenta inﬂuencee.\n10.5.2. O PTIMIZING FOR COLLECTIVE REWARD\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Tragedy\nFigure 15: Total collective reward obtained by agents trained\nto optimize for the collective reward, for the 5 best hyperpa-\nrameter settings with 5 random seeds each. Error bars show\na 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding\nwindow of 200 agent steps.\nIn this section we include the results of training explicitly\nprosocial agents, which directly optimize for the collective\nreward of all agents. Previous work (e.g. Peysakhovich &\nLerer (2018)) has shown that training agents to optimize\nfor the rewards of other agents can help the group to obtain\nbetter collective outcomes. Following a similar principle, we\nimplemented agents that optimize for a convex combination\nof their own individual rewardek\nt and the collective reward\nof all other agents,∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. Thus, the reward function\nfor agentk isrk\nt =ek\nt +η∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. We conducted the\nsame hyperparameter search over the parameters mentioned\nin Section 10.4.1 varying the weight placed on the collective\nreward,η∈ [0,2].\nAs expected, we ﬁnd that agents trained to optimize for col-\nlective reward attain higher collective reward in bothCleanup\nand Harvest, as is shown in Figure 15. In both games, the\noptimal value forη = 0.85. Interestingly, however, the equal-\nity in the individual returns for these agents is extremely low.\nAcross the hyperparameter sweep, no solution to theCleanup\ngame which scored more than 20 points in terms of collective\nreturn was found in which all agents scored an individual\nreturn above 0. It seems that in Cleanup, when agents are\ntrained to optimize for collective return, they converge on a\nsolution in which some agents never receive any reward.\nNote that training agents to optimize for collective reward\nrequires that each agent can view the rewards obtained by\nother agents. As discussed previously, the social inﬂuence\nreward is a novel way to obtain cooperative behavior, that\ndoes not require making this assumption.\n10.5.3. C OLLECTIVE REWARD AND EQUALITY\nIt is important to note that collective reward is not always the\nperfect metric of cooperative behavior, a ﬁnding that was also\ndiscovered by Barton et al. (2018) and emphasized by Leibo\net al. (2017). In the case, we ﬁnd that there is a spurious\nsolution to the Harvest game, in which one agent fails to\nlearn and fails to collect any apples. This leads to very high\ncollective reward, since it means there is one fewer agent\nthat can exploit the others, and makes sustainable harvesting\neasier to achieve. Therefore, for the results shown in the\npaper, we eliminate any random seed inHarvest for which\none of the agents has failed to learn to collect apples, as in\nprevious work (Hughes et al., 2018).\nHowever, here we also present an alternative strategy for\nassessing the overall collective outcomes: weighting the total\ncollective reward by an index of equality of the individual\nrewards. Speciﬁcally, we compute the Gini coefﬁcient over\ntheN agents’ individual environmental rewardsek\nt :\nG =\n∑N\ni=1\n∑N\nj=1|ei\nt−ej\nt|\n2N∑N\ni=1ei\nt\n, (9)\n\n<!-- page: 16 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nwhich gives us a measure of the inequality of the returns,\nwhereG∈ [0,1], withG = 0indicating perfect equality. Thus,\n1−G is a measure of equality; we use this to weight the\ncollective reward for each experiment, and plot the results in\nFigure 16. Once again, we see that the inﬂuence models give\nthe highest ﬁnal performance, even with this new metric.\n10.5.4. C OLLECTIVE REWARD OVER MULTIPLE\nHYPERPARAMETERS\nFinally, we would like to show that the inﬂuence reward is\nrobust to the choice of hyperparameter settings. Therefore,\nin Figure 17, we plot the collective reward of the top 5 best\nhyperparameter settings for each experiment, over 5 random\nseeds each. Once again, the inﬂuence models result in higher\ncollective reward, which provides evidence that the model is\nrobust to the choice of hyperparameters.\n10.5.5. PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN MODELS\nAND RELATED WORK\nTable 4 presents the ﬁnal collective reward obtained by each\nof the models tested in the experiments presented in the\npaper. We see that in several cases, the inﬂuence agents are\neven able to out-perform the state-of-the-art results on these\ntasks reported by (Hughes et al., 2018), despite the fact that\nthe solution proposed by (Hughes et al., 2018) requires that\nagents can view other agents’ rewards, whereas we do not\nmake this assumption, and instead only require that agents\ncan view each others’ actions.\nCleanup Harvest\nA3C baseline 89 485\nInequity aversion (Hughes et al.) 275 750\nInﬂuence - Basic 190 1073\nInﬂuence - Communication 166 951\nInﬂuence - Model of other agents 392 588\nTable 4: Final collective reward over the last 50 agent steps\nfor each of the models considered. Bolded entries represent\nexperiments in which the inﬂuence models signiﬁcantly out-\nperformed the scores reported in previous work oninequity\naversion (Hughes et al., 2018). This is impressive, consid-\nering the inequity averse agents are able to view all other\nagents’ rewards. We make no such assumption, and yet are\nable to achieve similar or superior performance.\n\n<!-- page: 17 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 16: Total collective reward times equality,R∗(1−G), obtained in all experiments. Error bars show a 99.5% conﬁdence\ninterval (CI) over 5 random seeds, computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. Once again, the models trained with\ninﬂuence reward (red) signiﬁcantly outperform the baseline and ablated models.\n\n<!-- page: 18 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 17: Total collective reward over the top 5 hyperparameter settings, with 5 random seeds each, for all experiments. Error\nbars show a 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. The inﬂuence models\nstill maintain an advantage over the baselines and ablated models, suggesting the technique is robust to the hyperparameter\nsettings.\n\n<!-- page: 19 -->\n\n000\n001\n002\n003\n004\n005\n006\n007\n008\n009\n010\n011\n012\n013\n014\n015\n016\n017\n018\n019\n020\n021\n022\n023\n024\n025\n026\n027\n028\n029\n030\n031\n032\n033\n034\n035\n036\n037\n038\n039\n040\n041\n042\n043\n044\n045\n046\n047\n048\n049\n050\n051\n052\n053\n054\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation\nfor Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning\nAnonymous Authors1\n1. Inﬂuence as Mutual Information\nThe causal inﬂuence of agentk on agentj is:\nDKL\n[\np(aj\nt|ak\nt,zt)\np(aj\nt|zt)\n]\n, (1)\nwherezt represents the conditioning variables at timestep\nt,zt =⟨uj\nt,sj\nt⟩. The inﬂuence reward to the mutual infor-\nmation (MI) between the actions of agentsk andj, which\nis given by\nI(Aj;Ak|z) =\n∑\nak,aj\np(aj,ak|z) log p(aj,ak|z)\np(aj|z)p(ak|z)\n=\n∑\nak\np(ak|z)DKL\n[\np(aj|ak,z )\np(aj|z)\n]\n,\n(2)\nwhere we see that the DKL factor in Eq. 2 is the causal\ninﬂuence reward given in Eq. 1.\nBy sampling N independent trajectories τn from the en-\nvironment, where k’s actionsak\nn are drawn according to\np(ak|z), we perform a Monte-Carlo approximation of the\nMI (see e.g. ?),\nI(Ak;Aj|z) = Eτ\n[\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|Ak,z )\np(Aj|z)\n]⏐⏐⏐z\n]\n≈ 1\nN\n∑\nn\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|ak\nn,z )\np(Aj|z)\n]\n. (3)\nThus, in expectation, the social inﬂuence reward is the MI\nbetween agents’ actions.\nWhether the policy trained with Eq. 1 actually learns to\napproximate the MI depends on the learning dynamics. We\ncalculate the intrinsic social inﬂuence reward using Eq. 1,\nbecause unlike Eq. 2, which gives an estimate of the sym-\nmetric bandwidth betweenk andj, Eq. 1 gives the directed\ncausal effect of the speciﬁc action taken by agentk,ak\nt . We\n1Anonymous Institution, Anonymous City, Anonymous Region,\nAnonymous Country. Correspondence to: Anonymous Author\n<anon.email@domain.com>.\nPreliminary work. Under review by the International Conference\non Machine Learning (ICML). Do not distribute.\nbelieve this will result in an easier reward to learn, since it\nallows for better credit assignment; agentk can more easily\nlearn which of its actions lead to high inﬂuence.\nThe connection to mutual information is interesting, because\na frequently used intrinsic motivation for single agent RL\nis empowerment, which rewards the agent for having high\nmutual information between its actions and the future state\nof the environment (e.g. ??). To the extent that the social\ninﬂuence reward approximates the MI, k is rewarded for\nhaving empowerment overj’s actions.\nThe social inﬂuence reward can also be computed using\nother divergence measures besides KL-divergence. ? pro-\npose local information ﬂow as a measure of direct causal\neffect; this is equivalent to thepointwise mutual information\n(the innermost term of Eq. 3), given by:\npmi(ak;aj|Z =z) = log p(aj|ak,z )\np(aj|z)\n= log p(ak,aj|z)\np(ak|z)p(aj|z). (4)\nThe PMI gives us a measure of inﬂuence of a single action\nofk on the single action taken byj. The expectation of the\nPMI overp(aj,ak|z) is the MI. We experiment with using\nthe PMI and a number of divergence measures, including\nthe Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD), and ﬁnd that the\ninﬂuence reward is robust to the choice of measure.\n2. Sequential Social Dilemmas\nFigure 1 depicts the SSD games under investigation. In\neach of the games, an agent is rewarded +1 for every apple\nit collects, but the apples are a limited resource. Agents\nhave the ability to punish each other with a ﬁning beam,\nwhich costs−1 reward to ﬁre, and ﬁnes any agent it hits\n−50 reward.\nIn Cleanup (a public goods game) agents must clean a\nriver before apples can grow, but are not able to harvest\napples while cleaning. In Harvest (a common pool resource\ngame), apples respawn at a rate proportional to the amount\nof nearby apples; if apples are harvested too quickly, they\nwill not grow back. Both coordination, and cooperation\nare required to solve both games. In Cleanup, agents\narXiv:1810.08647v4  [cs.LG]  18 Jun 2019\n\n<!-- page: 20 -->\n\n055\n056\n057\n058\n059\n060\n061\n062\n063\n064\n065\n066\n067\n068\n069\n070\n071\n072\n073\n074\n075\n076\n077\n078\n079\n080\n081\n082\n083\n084\n085\n086\n087\n088\n089\n090\n091\n092\n093\n094\n095\n096\n097\n098\n099\n100\n101\n102\n103\n104\n105\n106\n107\n108\n109\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nFigure 1: The two SSD environments, Cleanup (left) and Harvest (right). Agents can exploit other agents for immediate\npayoff, but at the expense of the long-term collective reward of the group. Reproduced with permission from ?.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 2: Schelling diagrams for the two social dilemma tasks show that an individual agent is motivated to defect, though\neveryone beneﬁts when more agents cooperate. Reproduced with permission from ?.\nmust efﬁciently time harvesting apples and cleaning\nthe river, and allow agents cleaning the river a chance\nto consume apples. In Harvest, agents must spatially\ndistribute their harvesting, and abstain from consuming\napples too quickly in order to harvest sustainably. The\ncode for these games, including hyperparameter settings\nand apple and waste respawn probabilities, can be found\nat https://github.com/eugenevinitsky/\nsequential_social_dilemma_games.\nThe reward structure of the games is shown in Figure 2,\nwhich gives the Schelling diagram for both SSD tasks under\ninvestigation. A Schelling diagram (??) depicts the relative\npayoffs for a single agent’s strategy given a ﬁxed number\nof other agents who are cooperative. These diagrams show\nthat all agents would beneﬁt from learning to cooperate,\nbecause even the agents that are being exploited get higher\nreward than in the regime where all agents defect. However,\ntraditional RL agents struggle to learn to cooperate and solve\nthese tasks effectively (?).\n3. Additional experiment - Box Trapped\nAs a proof-of-concept experiment to test whether the inﬂu-\nence reward works as expected, we constructed a special\nenvironment, shown in Figure 3. In this environment, one\nagent (teal) is trapped in a box. The other agent (purple) has\na special action it can use to open the box... or it can simply\nchoose to consume apples, which exist outside the box and\nare inexhaustible in this environment.\nAs expected, a vanilla A3C agent learns to act selﬁshly; the\nFigure 3: The Box trapped environment in which the teal\nagent is trapped, and the purple agent can release it with a\nspecial open box action.\npurple agent will simply consume apples, and chooses the\nopen box action in 0% of trajectories once the policy has con-\nverged. A video of A3C agents trained in this environment\nis available at: https://youtu.be/C8SE9_YKzxI,\nwhich shows that the purple agent leaves its compatriot\ntrapped in the box throughout the trajectory.\nIn contrast, an agent trained with the social inﬂuence re-\nward chooses the open box action in 88% of trajectories,\nreleasing its fellow agent so that they are both able to\nconsume apples. A video of this behavior is shown at:\nhttps://youtu.be/Gfo248-qt3c. Further, as Fig-\nure 4 reveals, the purple inﬂuencer agent usually chooses\nto open the box within the ﬁrst few steps of the trajetory,\ngiving its fellow agent more time to collect reward.\nMost importantly though, Figure 5 shows the inﬂuence re-\n\n<!-- page: 21 -->\n\n110\n111\n112\n113\n114\n115\n116\n117\n118\n119\n120\n121\n122\n123\n124\n125\n126\n127\n128\n129\n130\n131\n132\n133\n134\n135\n136\n137\n138\n139\n140\n141\n142\n143\n144\n145\n146\n147\n148\n149\n150\n151\n152\n153\n154\n155\n156\n157\n158\n159\n160\n161\n162\n163\n164\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nward over the course of a trajectory in the Box trapped\nenvironment. The agent chooses the open box action in\nthe second timestep; at this point, we see a corresponding\nspike in the inﬂuence reward. This reveals that the inﬂuence\nreward works as expected, incentivizing an action which\nhas a strong — and in this case, prosocial — effect on the\nother agent’s behavior.\nFigure 4: Number of times the open box action occurs at\neach trajectory step over 100 trajectories.\nFigure 5: Inﬂuence reward over a trajectory in Box trapped.\nAn agent gets high inﬂuence for letting another agent out of\nthe box in which it is trapped.\n4. Implementation details\nAll models are trained with a single convolutional layer with\na kernel of size 3, stride of size 1, and 6 output channels.\nThis is connected to two fully connected layers of size 32\neach, and an LSTM with 128 cells. We use a discount factor\nγ =.99. The number of agentsN is ﬁxed to 5.\nIn addition to the comparison function used to compute\ninﬂuence (e.g. KL-divergence, PMI, JSD), there are many\nother hyperparameters that can be tuned for each model.\nWe use a random search over hyperparameters, ensuring\na fair comparison with the search size over the baseline\nparameters that are shared with the inﬂuence models. For\nall models we search for the optimal entropy reward and\nlearning rate, where we anneal the learning rate from an\ninitial value lr init to lr final. The below sections\ngive the parameters found to be most effective for each of\nthe three experiments.\n4.1. Basic inﬂuence hyperparameters\nIn this setting we vary the number of inﬂuencers from 1− 4,\nthe inﬂuence reward weightβ, and the number of curricu-\nlum steps over which the weight of the inﬂuence reward\nis linearly increased C. In this setting, since we have a\ncentralised controller, we also experiment with giving the\ninﬂuence reward to the agent being inﬂuenced as well, and\nﬁnd that this sometimes helps. This ‘inﬂuencee’ reward is\nnot used in the other two experiments, since it precludes\nindependent training. The hyperparameters found to give\nthe best performance for each model are shown in Table 1.\n4.2. Communication hyperparameters\nBecause the communication models have an extra A2C out-\nput head for the communication policy, we use an additional\nentropy regularization term just for this head, and apply a\nweight to the communication loss in the loss function. We\nalso vary the number of communication symbols that the\nagents can emit, and the size of the linear layer that con-\nnects the LSTM to the communication policy layer, which\nwe term the communication embedding size. Finally, in the\ncommunication regime, we experiment to setting the weight\non the extrinsic reward E,α, to zero. The best hyperparam-\neters for each of the communication models are shown in\nTable 2.\n4.3. Model of other agents (MOA) hyperparameters\nThe MOA hyperparameters include whether to only train\nthe MOA with cross-entropy loss on the actions of agents\nthat are visible, and how much to weight the supervised loss\nin the overall loss of the model. The best hyperparameters\nare shown in Table 3.\n4.4. Communication analysis\nThe speaker consistency metric is calculated as:\nN∑\nk=1\n0.5[\n∑\nc\n1− H(p(ak|mk =c))\nHmax\n+\n∑\na\n1− H(p(mk|ak =a))\nHmax\n], (5)\nwhereH is the entropy function andHmax is the maximum\nentropy based on the number of discrete symbols or actions.\n\n<!-- page: 22 -->\n\n165\n166\n167\n168\n169\n170\n171\n172\n173\n174\n175\n176\n177\n178\n179\n180\n181\n182\n183\n184\n185\n186\n187\n188\n189\n190\n191\n192\n193\n194\n195\n196\n197\n198\n199\n200\n201\n202\n203\n204\n205\n206\n207\n208\n209\n210\n211\n212\n213\n214\n215\n216\n217\n218\n219\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .000248 .000687 .00184 .00025\nlr init .00126 .00126 .00107 .00136 .00215 .00107\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000042 .000028 .000013 .000042\nNumber of inﬂuencers - 3 1 - 3 3\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .146 - 0 .224\nCurriculumC - - 140 - - 140\nPolicy comparison - - JSD - - PMI\nInﬂuencee reward - - 1 - - 0\nTable 1: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the basic inﬂuence experiment.\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nA3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nEntropy reg. .00176 .000249 .00305 .000687 .000174 .00220\nlr init .00126 .00223 .00249 .00136 .00137 .000413\nlr end .000012 .000022 .0000127 .000028 .0000127 .000049\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 2.752 - 0 4.825\nExtrinsic reward\nweightα - - 0 - - 1.0\nCurriculumC - - 1 - - 8\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nComm. entropy reg. - - .000789 - - .00208\nComm. loss weight - - .0758 - - .0709\nSymbol vocab size - - 9 - - 7\nComm. embedding - - 32 - - 16\nTable 2: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the communication experiment.\nThe goal of the metric is to measure how much of a 1:1\ncorrespondence exists between a speaker’s action and the\nspeaker’s communication message.\n5. Additional results\n5.1. Basic inﬂuence emergent communication\nFigure 6 shows an additional moment of high inﬂuence in\nthe Cleanup game. The purple inﬂuencer agent can see the\narea within the white box, and therefore all of the apple\npatch. The ﬁeld-of-view of the magenta inﬂuencee is out-\nlined with the magenta box; it cannot see if apples have\nappeared, even though it has been cleaning the river, which\nis the action required to cause apples to appear. When the\npurple inﬂuencer turns left and does not move towards the\napple patch, this signals to the magenta agent that no apples\nhave appeared, since otherwise the inﬂuence would move\nright.\n5.2. Optimizing for collective reward\nIn this section we include the results of training explicitly\nprosocial agents, which directly optimize for the collective\nreward of all agents. Previous work (e.g. ?) has shown that\ntraining agents to optimize for the rewards of other agents\ncan help the group to obtain better collective outcomes.\nFigure 6: A moment of high inﬂuence between the purple\ninﬂuencer and magenta inﬂuencee.\nFollowing a similar principle, we implemented agents that\noptimize for a convex combination of their own individual\nreward ek\nt and the collective reward of all other agents,∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. Thus, the reward function for agentk isrk\nt =\nek\nt +η∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. We conducted the same hyperparameter\nsearch over the parameters mentioned in Section 4.1 varying\nthe weight placed on the collective reward,η∈ [0, 2].\nAs expected, we ﬁnd that agents trained to optimize for\ncollective reward attain higher collective reward in both\n\n<!-- page: 23 -->\n\n220\n221\n222\n223\n224\n225\n226\n227\n228\n229\n230\n231\n232\n233\n234\n235\n236\n237\n238\n239\n240\n241\n242\n243\n244\n245\n246\n247\n248\n249\n250\n251\n252\n253\n254\n255\n256\n257\n258\n259\n260\n261\n262\n263\n264\n265\n266\n267\n268\n269\n270\n271\n272\n273\n274\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nA3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .00176 .000687 .00495 .00223\nlr init .00126 .00123 .00123 .00136 .00206 .00120\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000012 .000028 .000022 .000044\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .620 - 0 2.521\nMOA loss weight - 1.312 15.007 - 1.711 10.911\nCurriculumC - - 40 - - 226\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nTrain MOA only\nwhen visible - False True - False True\nTable 3: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the model of other agents (MOA) experiment.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Tragedy\nFigure 7: Total collective reward obtained by agents trained\nto optimize for the collective reward, for the 5 best hyperpa-\nrameter settings with 5 random seeds each. Error bars show\na 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding\nwindow of 200 agent steps.\nCleanup and Harvest, as is shown in Figure 7. In both\ngames, the optimal value forη = 0.85. Interestingly, how-\never, the equality in the individual returns for these agents\nis extremely low. Across the hyperparameter sweep, no\nsolution to the Cleanup game which scored more than 20\npoints in terms of collective return was found in which all\nagents scored an individual return above 0. It seems that in\nCleanup, when agents are trained to optimize for collective\nreturn, they converge on a solution in which some agents\nnever receive any reward.\nNote that training agents to optimize for collective reward\nrequires that each agent can view the rewards obtained by\nother agents. As discussed previously, the social inﬂuence\nreward is a novel way to obtain cooperative behavior, that\ndoes not require making this assumption.\n5.3. Performance comparison between models and\nrelated work\nTable 4 presents the ﬁnal collective reward obtained by each\nof the models tested in the experiments presented in the\npaper. We see that in several cases, the inﬂuence agents\nare even able to out-perform the state-of-the-art results on\nthese tasks reported by ( ?), despite the fact that the solu-\ntion proposed by ( ?) requires that agents can view other\nagents’ rewards, whereas we do not make this assumption,\nand instead only require that agents can view each others’\nactions.\n5.4. Collective reward and equality\nIt is important to note that collective reward is not always\nthe perfect metric of cooperative behavior, a ﬁnding that was\nalso discovered by ? and emphasized by ?. In the case, we\nﬁnd that there is a spurious solution to the Harvest game, in\nwhich one agent fails to learn and fails to collect any apples.\nThis leads to very high collective reward, since it means\nthere is one fewer agent that can exploit the others, and\nmakes sustainable harvesting easier to achieve. Therefore,\nfor the results shown in the paper, we eliminate any random\nseed in Harvest for which one of the agents has failed to\nlearn to collect apples, as in previous work (?).\nHowever, here we also present an alternative strategy for as-\nsessing the overall collective outcomes: weighting the total\ncollective reward by an index of equality of the individual\nrewards. Speciﬁcally, we compute the Gini coefﬁcient over\ntheN agents’ individual environmental rewardsek\nt :\nG =\n∑N\ni=1\n∑N\nj=1|ei\nt−ej\nt|\n2N∑N\ni=1ei\nt\n, (6)\nwhich gives us a measure of the inequality of the returns,\nwhereG∈ [0, 1], with G = 0 indicating perfect equality.\nThus, 1−G is a measure of equality; we use this to weight\nthe collective reward for each experiment, and plot the re-\nsults in Figure 8. Once again, we see that the inﬂuence\nmodels give the highest ﬁnal performance, even with this\nnew metric.\n5.5. Collective reward over multiple hyperparameters\nFinally, we would like to show that the inﬂuence reward is\nrobust to the choice of hyperparameter settings. Therefore,\nin Figure 9, we plot the collective reward of the top 5 best\nhyperparameter settings for each experiment, over 5 random\nseeds each. Once again, the inﬂuence models result in higher\n\n<!-- page: 24 -->\n\n275\n276\n277\n278\n279\n280\n281\n282\n283\n284\n285\n286\n287\n288\n289\n290\n291\n292\n293\n294\n295\n296\n297\n298\n299\n300\n301\n302\n303\n304\n305\n306\n307\n308\n309\n310\n311\n312\n313\n314\n315\n316\n317\n318\n319\n320\n321\n322\n323\n324\n325\n326\n327\n328\n329\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nA3C baseline 89 485\nInequity aversion (?) 275 750\nInﬂuence - Basic 190 1073\nInﬂuence - Communication 166 951\nInﬂuence - Model of other agents 392 588\nTable 4: Final collective reward over the last 50 agent steps for each of the models considered. Bolded entries represent\nexperiments in which the inﬂuence models signiﬁcantly outperformed the scores reported in previous work on inequity\naversion(?). This is impressive, considering the inequity averse agents are able to view all other agents’ rewards. We make\nno such assumption, and yet are able to achieve similar or superior performance.\ncollective reward, which provides evidence that the model\nis robust to the choice of hyperparameters.\n\n<!-- page: 25 -->\n\n330\n331\n332\n333\n334\n335\n336\n337\n338\n339\n340\n341\n342\n343\n344\n345\n346\n347\n348\n349\n350\n351\n352\n353\n354\n355\n356\n357\n358\n359\n360\n361\n362\n363\n364\n365\n366\n367\n368\n369\n370\n371\n372\n373\n374\n375\n376\n377\n378\n379\n380\n381\n382\n383\n384\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 8: Total collective reward times equality, R∗ (1−G), obtained in all experiments. Error bars show a 99.5%\nconﬁdence interval (CI) over 5 random seeds, computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. Once again, the models\ntrained with inﬂuence reward (red) signiﬁcantly outperform the baseline and ablated models.\n\n<!-- page: 26 -->\n\n385\n386\n387\n388\n389\n390\n391\n392\n393\n394\n395\n396\n397\n398\n399\n400\n401\n402\n403\n404\n405\n406\n407\n408\n409\n410\n411\n412\n413\n414\n415\n416\n417\n418\n419\n420\n421\n422\n423\n424\n425\n426\n427\n428\n429\n430\n431\n432\n433\n434\n435\n436\n437\n438\n439\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 9: Total collective reward over the top 5 hyperparameter settings, with 5 random seeds each, for all experiments. Error\nbars show a 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. The inﬂuence models\nstill maintain an advantage over the baselines and ablated models, suggesting the technique is robust to the hyperparameter\nsettings.", "current_statement": "# “How would j’s action change if I had acted\n\n“How would j’s action change if I had acted\n\ndifferently in this situation?”.\nBy sampling several counterfactual actions, and av-\neraging the resulting policy distribution of j in\neach case, we obtain the marginal policy of j,\np(aj\nt|sj\nt ) = ∑\n˜ak\nt\np(aj\nt|˜ak\nt,sj\nt )p(˜ak\nt|sj\nt ) —in other words,\nj’s policy if it did not consider agentk. The discrepancy\nbetween the marginal policy ofj and the conditional policy\nofj givenk’s action is a measure of the causal inﬂuence\nofk onj; it gives the degree to whichj changes its planned\naction distribution because ofk’s action. Thus, the causal\ninﬂuence reward for agentk is:\nck\nt =\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt )\n\n∑\n˜ak\nt\np(aj\nt| ˜ak\nt,sj\nt )p(˜ak\nt|sj\nt )]\n]\n=\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt )\np(aj\nt|sj\nt )]\n]\n. (1)\nNote that it is possible to use a divergence metric other than\nKL; we have found empirically that the inﬂuence reward is\nrobust to the choice of metric.\nThe reward in Eq. 4 is related to the mutual information (MI)\nbetween the actions of agentsk andj,I(ak;aj|s). As the\nreward is computed over many trajectories sampled inde-\npendently from the environment, we obtain a Monte-Carlo\nestimate ofI(ak;aj|s). In expectation, the inﬂuence reward\nincentivizes agents to maximize the mutual information\nbetween their actions. The proof is given in Section 10.1\nof the Supplementary Material. Intuitively, training agents\nto maximize the MI between their actions results in more\ncoordinated behavior.\nMoreover, the variance of policy gradient updates increases\nas the number of agents in the environment grows (Lowe et al.,\n2017). This issue can hinder convergence to equilibrium for\nlarge-scale MARL tasks. Social inﬂuence can reduce the\nvariance of policy gradients by introducing explicit depen-\ndencies across the actions of each agent. This is because the\nconditional variance of the gradients an agent is receiving\nwill be less than or equal to the marginalized variance.\nNote that for the basic inﬂuence model we make two assump-\ntions: 1) we use centralized training to computeck\nt directly\nfrom the policy of agentj, and 2) we assume that inﬂuence is\nunidirectional: agents trained with the inﬂuence reward can\nonly inﬂuence agents that are not trained with the inﬂuence\nreward (the sets of inﬂuencers and inﬂuencees are disjoint,\nand the number of inﬂuencers is in[1,N−1]). Both of these\nassumptions are relaxed in later sections. Further details, as\nwell as further explanation of the causal inference procedure\n(including causal diagrams) are available in Section 8.\n4.1. Experiment I: Basic Inﬂuence\nFigure 1 shows the results of testing agents trained with the\nbasic inﬂuence reward against standard A3C agents, and an\nablated version of the model in which agents do not receive\nthe inﬂuence reward, but are able to condition their policy\non the actions of other agents (even when the other agents\nare not within the agent’s partially observed view of the\nenvironment). We term this ablated model thevisible actions\nbaseline. In this and all other results ﬁgures, we measure\nthe total collective reward obtained using the best hyper-\nparameter setting tested with 5 random seeds each. Error\nbars show a 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) over the random\nseeds, computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps.\nWe use a curriculum learning approach which gradually\nincreases the weight of the social inﬂuence reward overC\nsteps (C∈ [0.2−3.5]×108); this sometimes leads to a slight\ndelay before the inﬂuence models’ performance improves.\nAs is evident in Figures 1a and 1b, introducing an awareness\nof other agents’ actions helps, but having the social inﬂuence\nreward eventually leads to signiﬁcantly higher collective\nreward in both games. Due to the structure of the SSD games,\nwe can infer that agents that obtain higher collective reward\nlearned to cooperate more effectively. In theHarvest MARL\n\n<!-- page: 4 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nsetting, it is clear that the inﬂuence reward is essential to\nachieve any reasonable learning.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 1: Total collective reward obtained in Experiment 1.\nAgents trained with inﬂuence (red) signiﬁcantly outperform\nthe baseline and ablated agents. In Harvest, the inﬂuence\nreward is essential to achieve any meaningful learning.\nTo understand how social inﬂuence helps agents achieve\ncooperative behavior, we investigated the trajectories\nproduced by high scoring models in both Cleanup and\nHarvest; the analysis revealed interesting behavior.\nAs an example, in the Cleanup video available here:\nhttps://youtu.be/iH_V5WKQxmo a single agent\n(shown in purple) was trained with the social inﬂuence\nreward. Unlike the other agents, which continue to move\nand explore randomly while waiting for apples to spawn,\nthe inﬂuencer only traverses the map when it is pursuing an\napple, then stops. The rest of the time it stays still.\nFigure 2: A moment\nof high inﬂuence when\nthe purple inﬂuencer sig-\nnals the presence of\nan apple (green tiles)\noutside the yellow in-\nﬂuencee’s ﬁeld-of-view\n(yellow outlined box).\nFigure 2 shows a moment of\nhigh inﬂuence between the in-\nﬂuencer and the yellow inﬂu-\nencee. The inﬂuencer has cho-\nsen to move towards an ap-\nple that is outside of the ego-\ncentric ﬁeld-of-view of the yel-\nlow agent. Because the inﬂu-\nencer only moves when apples\nare available, this signals to the\nyellow agent that an apple must\nbe present above it which it\ncannot see. This changes the\nyellow agent’s distribution over\nits planned action,p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt ),\nand allows the purple agent to\ngain inﬂuence. A similar mo-\nment occurs when the inﬂu-\nencer signals to an agent that has\nbeen cleaning the river that no\napples have appeared by staying\nstill (see Figure 14 in the Sup-\nplementary Material).\nIn this case study, the inﬂuencer agent learned to use its own\nactions as a binary code which signals the presence or absence\nof apples in the environment. We observe a similar effect in\nHarvest. This type of action-based communication could be\nlikened to the bee waggle dance discovered by von Frisch\n(1969). Evidently, the inﬂuence reward gave rise not only to\ncooperative behavior, but to emergent communication.\nIt is important to consider the limitations of the inﬂuence\nreward. Whether it will always give rise to cooperative be-\nhavior may depend on the speciﬁcs of the environment and\ntask, and tuning the trade-off between environmental and\ninﬂuence reward. Although inﬂuence is arguably necessary\nfor coordination (e.g. two agents coordinating to manipulate\nan object must have a high degree of inﬂuence between their\nactions), it may be possible to inﬂuence another agent in a\nnon-cooperative way. The results provided here show that the\ninﬂuence reward did lead to increased cooperation, in spite of\ncooperation being difﬁcult to achieve in these environments.\n5. Inﬂuential Communication\nGiven the above results, we next experiment with using the\ninﬂuence reward to train agents to use an explicit commu-\nnication channel. We take some inspiration from research\ndrawing a connection between inﬂuence and communication\nin human learning. According to Melis & Semmann (2010),\nhuman children rapidly learn to use communication to inﬂu-\nence the behavior of others when engaging in cooperative\nactivities. They explain that “this ability to inﬂuence the\npartner via communication has been interpreted as evidence\nfor a capacity to form shared goals with others”, and that this\ncapacity may be “what allows humans to engage in a wide\nrange of cooperative activities”.\nThus, we equip agents with an explicit communication chan-\nnel, similar to the approach used by Foerster et al. (2016).\nAt each timestep, each agentk chooses a discrete commu-\nnication symbolmk\nt ; these symbols are concatenated into\na combined message vector mt = [m0\nt,m1\nt...mN\nt ], for N\nagents. This message vector mt is then given as input to\nevery other agent in the next timestep. Note that previous\nwork has shown that self-interested agents do not learn to use\nthis type of ungrounded, cheap talk communication chan-\nnel effectively (Crawford & Sobel, 1982; Cao et al., 2018;\nFoerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou et al., 2018).\nTo train the agents to communicate, we augment our initial\nnetwork with an additional A3C output head, that learns a\ncommunication policyπm and value functionVm to deter-\nmine which symbol to emit (see Figure 3). The normal policy\nand value function used for acting in the environment,πe and\nVe, are trained only with environmental rewarde. We use\nthe inﬂuence reward as an additional incentive for training\nthe communication policy,πm, such thatr =αe+βc. Coun-\nterfactuals are employed to assess how much inﬂuence an\nagent’s communication message from the previous timestep,\n\n<!-- page: 5 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nFigure 3: The communication model has two heads, which\nlearn the environment policy,πe, and a policy for emitting\ncommunication symbols,πm. Other agents’ communication\nmessages mt−1 are input to the LSTM.\nmk\nt−1, has on another agent’s action,aj\nt, where:\nck\nt =\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|mk\nt−1,sj\nt )\np(aj\nt|sj\nt )]\n]\n(2)\nImportantly, rewarding inﬂuence through a communication\nchannel does not suffer from the limitation mentioned in the\nprevious section, i.e. that it may be possible to inﬂuence\nanother agent in a non-cooperative way. We can see this\nfor two reasons. First, there is nothing that compels agent\nj to act based on agentk’s communication message; ifmk\nt\ndoes not contain valuable information,j is free to ignore it.\nSecond, becausej’s action policyπe is trained only with en-\nvironmental reward,j will only change its intended action as\na result of observingmk\nt (i.e. be inﬂuenced bymk\nt ) if it con-\ntains information that helpsj to obtain environmental reward.\nTherefore, we hypothesize that inﬂuential communication\nmust provide useful information to the listener.\n5.1. Experiment II: Inﬂuential Communication\nFigure 4 shows the collective reward obtained when training\nthe agents to use an explicit communication channel. Here,\nthe ablated model has the same structure as in Figure 3, but\nthe communication policyπm is trained only with environ-\nmental reward. We observe that the agents incentivized to\ncommunicate via the social inﬂuence reward learn faster, and\nachieve signiﬁcantly higher collective reward for the majority\nof training in both games. In fact, in the case ofCleanup, we\nfound thatα = 0in the optimal hyperparameter setting, mean-\ning that it was most effective to train the communication head\nwith zero extrinsic reward (see Table 2 in the Supplementary\nMaterial). This suggests that inﬂuence alone can be a suf-\nﬁcient mechanism for training an effective communication\npolicy. In Harvest, once again inﬂuence is critical to allow\nagents to learn coordinated policies and attain high reward.\nTo analyze the communication behaviour learned by the\nagents, we introduce three metrics, partially inspired by\n(Bogin et al., 2018). Speaker consistency, is a normalized\nscore∈ [0,1] which assesses the entropy ofp(ak|mk) and\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 4: Total collective reward for deep RL agents with\ncommunication channels. Once again, the inﬂuence reward\nis essential to improve or achieve any learning.\np(mk|ak) to determine how consistently a speaker agent\nemits a particular symbol when it takes a particular action,\nand vice versa (the formula is given in the Supplementary\nMaterial Section 10.4.4). We expect this measure to be\nhigh if, for example, the speaker always emits the same\nsymbol when it is cleaning the river. We also introduce\ntwo measures of instantaneous coordination (IC), which\nare both measures of mutual information (MI): (1) sym-\nbol/action IC =I(mk\nt ;aj\nt+1) measures the MI between the in-\nﬂuencer/speaker’s symbol and the inﬂuencee/listener’s next\naction, and (2) action/action IC=I(ak\nt ;aj\nt+1) measures the\nMI between the inﬂuencer’s action and the inﬂuencee’s next\naction. To compute these measures we ﬁrst average over all\ntrajectory steps, then take the maximum value between any\ntwo agents, to determine if any pair of agents are coordinat-\ning. Note that these measures are allinstantaneous, as they\nconsider only short-term dependencies across two consecu-\ntive timesteps, and cannot capture if an agent communicates\ninﬂuential compositional messages, i.e. information that re-\nquires several consecutive symbols to transmit and only then\naffects the other agents behavior.\nFigure 5: Metrics describing the quality of learned com-\nmunication protocols. The models trained with inﬂuence\nreward exhibit more consistent communication and more\ncoordination, especially in moments where inﬂuence is high.\nFigure 5 presents the results. The speaker consistencies\nmetric reveals that inﬂuence agents more unambiguously\ncommunicate about their own actions than baseline agents,\nindicating that the emergent communication is more mean-\ningful. The IC metrics demonstrate that baseline agents\nshow almost no signs of co-ordinating behavior with com-\nmunication, i.e. speakers saying A and listeners doing B\nconsistently. This result is aligned with both theoretical re-\n\n<!-- page: 6 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nsults in cheap-talk literature (Crawford & Sobel, 1982), and\nrecent empirical results in MARL (e.g. Foerster et al. (2016);\nLazaridou et al. (2018); Cao et al. (2018)).\nIn contrast, we do see high IC between inﬂuence agents,\nbut only when we limit the analysis to timesteps on which\ninﬂuence was greater than or equal to the mean inﬂuence\n(cf. inﬂuential moments in Figure 5). Inspecting the results\nreveals a common pattern: inﬂuence is sparse in time. An\nagent’s inﬂuence is only greater than its mean inﬂuence in\nless than 10% of timesteps. Because the listener agent is\nnot compelled to listen to any given speaker, listeners se-\nlectively listen to a speaker only when it is beneﬁcial, and\ninﬂuence cannot occur all the time. Only when the listener\ndecides to change its action based on the speaker’s message\ndoes inﬂuence occur, and in these moments we observe high\nI(mk\nt ;aj\nt+1). It appears the inﬂuencers have learned a strat-\negy of communicating meaningful information about their\nown actions, and gaining inﬂuence when this becomes rele-\nvant enough for the listener to act on it.\nExamining the relationship between the degree to which\nagents were inﬂuenced by communication and the reward\nthey obtained gives a compelling result: agents that are the\nmost inﬂuenced also achieve higher individual environmental\nreward. We sampled 100 different experimental conditions\n(i.e., hyper-parameters and random seeds) for both games,\nand normalized and correlated the inﬂuence and individual\nrewards. We found that agents who are more often inﬂuenced\ntend to achieve higher task reward in bothCleanup,ρ =.67,\np<0.001, and Harvest, ρ =.34, p<0.001. This supports\nthe hypothesis that in order to inﬂuence another agent via\ncommunication, the communication message should contain\ninformation that helps the listener maximize its own environ-\nmental reward. Since better listeners/inﬂuencees are more\nsuccessful in terms of task reward, we have evidence that\nuseful information was transmitted to them.\nThis result is promising, but may depend on the speciﬁc ex-\nperimental approach taken here, in which agents interact\nwith each other repeatedly. In this case, there is no advantage\nto the speaker for communicating unreliable information\n(i.e. lying), because it would lose inﬂuence with the listener\nover time. This may not be guaranteed in one-shot interac-\ntions. However, given repeated interactions, the above results\nprovide empirical evidence that social inﬂuence as intrinsic\nmotivation allows agents to learn meaningful communication\nprotocols when this is otherwise not possible.\n6. Modeling Other Agents\nComputing the causal inﬂuence reward as introduced in Sec-\ntion 4 requires knowing the probability of another agent’s\naction given a counterfactual, which we previously solved\nby using a centralized training approach in which agents\ncould access other agents’ policy networks. While using a\ncentralized training framework is common in MARL (e.g.\nFoerster et al. (2017; 2016)), it is less realistic than a scenario\nin which each agent is trained independently. We can relax\nthis assumption and achieve independent training by equip-\nping each agent with its own internalModel of Other Agents\n(MOA). The MOA consists of a second set of fully-connected\nand LSTM layers connected to the agent’s convolutional layer\n(see Figure 6), and is trained to predict all other agents’ next\nactions given their previous actions, and the agent’s egocen-\ntric view of the state:p(at+1|at,sk\nt ). The MOA is trained\nusing observed action trajectories and cross-entropy loss.\nFigure 6: The Model of Other Agents (MOA) architecture\nlearns both an RL policy πe, and a supervised model that\npredicts the actions of other agents, at+1. The supervised\nmodel is used for internally computing the inﬂuence reward.\nA trained MOA can be used to compute the social inﬂuence\nreward in the following way. Each agent can “imagine” coun-\nterfactual actions that it could have taken at each timestep,\nand use its internal MOA to predict the effect on other agents.\nIt can then give itself reward for taking actions that it esti-\nmates were the most inﬂuential. This has an intuitive appeal,\nbecause it resembles how humans reason about their effect\non others (Ferguson et al., 2010). We often ﬁnd ourselves\nasking counterfactual questions of the form, “How would she\nhave acted if I had done something else in that situation?”,\nwhich we answer using our internal model of others.\nLearning a model ofp(aj\nt+1|ak\nt,sk\nt ) requires implicitly mod-\neling both other agents’ internal states and behavior, as well\nas the environment transition function. If the model is inaccu-\nrate, this would lead to noisy estimates of the causal inﬂuence\nreward. To compensate for this, We only give the inﬂuence\nreward to an agent (k) when the agent it is attempting to inﬂu-\nence (j) is within its ﬁeld-of-view, because the estimates of\np(aj\nt+1|ak\nt,sk\nt ) are more accurate whenj is visible tok.2 This\nconstraint could have the side-effect of encouraging agents to\nstay in closer proximity. However, an intrinsic social reward\nencouraging proximity is reasonable given that humans seek\nafﬁliation and to spend time near other people (Tomasello,\n2This contrasts with our previous models in which the inﬂuence\nreward was obtained even from non-visible agents.\n\n<!-- page: 7 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n2009).\n6.1. Experiment III: Modeling Other Agents\nAs before, we allow the policy LSTM of each agent to condi-\ntion on the actions of other agents in the last timestep (actions\nare visible). We compare against an ablated version of the\narchitecture shown in Figure 6, which does not use the output\nof the MOA to compute a reward; rather, the MOA can be\nthought of as an unsupervised auxiliary task that may help the\nmodel to learn a better shared embedding layer, encouraging\nit to encode information relevant to predicting other agents’\nbehavior. Figure 7 shows the collective reward obtained for\nagents trained with a MOA module. While we see that the\nauxiliary task does help to improve reward over the A3C base-\nline, the inﬂuence agent gets consistently higher collective\nreward. These results demonstrate that the inﬂuence reward\ncan be effectively computed using an internal MOA, and thus\nagents can learn socially but independently, optimizing for a\nsocial reward without a centralized controller.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 7: Total collective reward for MOA models. Again,\nintrinsic inﬂuence consistently improves learning, with the\npowerful A3C agent baselines not being able to learn.\nAgents with inﬂuence achieve higher collective reward than\nthe previous state-of-the-art for these environments (275 for\nCleanup and 750 for Harvest) (Hughes et al., 2018). This is\ncompelling, given that previous work relied on the assump-\ntion that agents could view one another’s rewards; we make\nno such assumption, instead relying only on agents viewing\neach other’s actions. Table 4 of the Supplementary Material\ngives the ﬁnal collective reward obtained in previous work,\nand by each inﬂuence model for all three experiments.\n7. Related work\nSeveral attempts have been made to develop intrinsic social\nrewards.3 Sequeira et al. (2011) developed hand-crafted re-\nwards for a foraging environment, in which agents were pun-\nished for eating more than their fair share of food. Another\napproach gave agents an emotional intrinsic reward based\non their perception of their neighbours’ cooperativeness in\na networked version of the iterated prisoner’s dilemma, but\nis limited to scenarios in which it is possible to directly clas-\n3Note that intrinsic is not a synonym ofinternal; other people\ncan be intrinsically motivating (Stavropoulos & Carver, 2013).\nsify each action as cooperative or non-cooperative (Yu et al.,\n2013). This is untenable in complex settings with long-term\nstrategies, such as the SSDs under investigation here.\nSome approaches allow agents to view each others’ rewards\nin order to optimize for collective reward. Peysakhovich &\nLerer (2018) show that if even a single agent is trained to op-\ntimize for others’ rewards, it can signiﬁcantly help the group.\nHughes et al. (2018) introduced an inequity aversion moti-\nvation, which penalized agents if their rewards differed too\nmuch from those of the group. Liu et al. (2014) train agents\nto learn their own optimal reward function in a cooperative,\nmulti-agent setting with known group reward. However, the\nassumption that agents can view and optimize for each oth-\ners’ rewards may be unrealistic. Thus, recent work explores\ntraining agents that learn when to cooperate based solely on\ntheir own past rewards (Peysakhovich & Lerer, 2017).\nTraining agents to learn emergent communication protocols\nhas been explored (Foerster et al., 2016; Cao et al., 2018; Choi\net al., 2018; Lazaridou et al., 2018; Bogin et al., 2018), with\nmany authors ﬁnding that selﬁsh agents do not learn to use an\nungrounded, cheap talk communication channel effectively.\nCrawford & Sobel (1982) ﬁnd that in theory, the information\ncommunicated is proportional to the amount of common\ninterest; thus, as agents’ interests diverge, no communication\nis to be expected. And while communication can emerge\nwhen agents are prosocial (Foerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou\net al., 2018), curious (Oudeyer & Kaplan, 2006; Oudeyer &\nSmith, 2016; Forestier & Oudeyer, 2017), or hand-crafted\n(Crandall et al., 2017), self-interested agents do not to learn\nto communicate (Cao et al., 2018). We have shown that\nthe social inﬂuence reward can encourage agents to learn to\ncommunicate more effectively in complex environments.\nOur MOA is related to work on machine theory of mind\n(Rabinowitz et al., 2018), which demonstrated that a model\ntrained to predict agents’ actions can model false beliefs.\nLOLA agents model the impact of their policy on the param-\neter updates of other agents, and directly incorporate this into\nthe agent’s own learning rule (Foerster et al., 2018).\nBarton et al. (2018) propose causal inﬂuence as a way to mea-\nsure coordination between agents, speciﬁcally using Con-\nvergence Cross Mapping (CCM) to analyze the degree of\ndependence between two agents’ policies. The limitation\nif CCM is that estimates of causality are known to degrade\nin the presence of stochastic effects (Tajima et al., 2015).\nCounterfactual reasoning has also been used in a multi-agent\nsetting, to marginalize out the effect of one agent on a pre-\ndicted global value function estimating collective reward, and\nthus obtain an improved baseline for computing each agent’s\nadvantage function (Foerster et al., 2017). A similar paper\nshows that counterfactuals can be used with potential-based\nreward shaping to improve credit assignment for training a\njoint policy in multi-agent RL (Devlin et al., 2014). However,\n\n<!-- page: 8 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nonce again these approaches rely on a centralized controller.\nMutual information (MI) has been explored as a tool for de-\nsigning social rewards. Strouse et al. (2018) train agents to\noptimize the MI between their actions and a categorical goal,\nas a way to signal or hide the agent’s intentions. However, this\napproach depends on agents pursuing a known, categorical\ngoal. Guckelsberger et al. (2018), in pursuit of the ultimate\nvideo game adversary, develop an agent that maximizes its\nempowerment, minimizes the player’s empowerment, and\nmaximizes its empowerment over the player’s next state.\nThis third goal, termedtransfer empowerment, is obtained\nby maximizing the MI between the agent’s actions and the\nplayer’s future state. While a social form of empowerment,\nthe authors ﬁnd that agents trained with transfer empower-\nment simply tend to stay near the player. Further, the agents\nare not trained with RL, but rather analytically compute these\nmeasures in simple grid-world environments. As such, the\nagent cannot learn to model other agents or the environment.\nGiven the social inﬂuence reward incentivizes maximizing\nthe mutual information between agents’ actions, our work\nalso has ties to the literature on empowerment, in which\nagents maximize the mutual information between their ac-\ntions and their future state (Klyubin et al., 2005; Mohamed &\nRezende, 2015). Thus, our proposed reward can be seen as a\nnovel social form of empowerment.\n8. Details on Causal Inference\nThe causal inﬂuence reward presented in Eq. 4 is assessed\nusing counterfactual reasoning. Unlike ado-calculus inter-\nvention (which estimates the general expected causal effect\nof one variable on another), a counterfactual involves condi-\ntioning on a set of variables observed in a given situation and\nasking how would the outcome have changed if some vari-\nable were different, and all other variables remained the same\n(Pearl et al., 2016). This type of inquiry allows us to measure\nthe precise causal effect of agentk’s action at timestept,ak\nt ,\non agentj’s action,aj\nt, in the speciﬁc environment statest,\nproviding a richer and less sparse reward for agentk. Com-\nputing counterfactuals requires conditioning on the correct\nset of observed variables to ensure there are no confounds.\nIn our case, the conditioning set must include not only an\nagent’s partially observed view of the environment state,sj\nt,\nbut also the agent’s internal LSTM stateuj\nt, to remove any\ndependency on previous timesteps in the trajectory. Thus, the\nbasic causal inﬂuence reward can be more accurately written:\nck\nt =\nN∑\nj=0,j̸=k\n[\nDKL [p(aj\nt|ak\nt,sj\nt,uj\nt )||p(aj\nt|sj\nt,uj\nt )]\n]\n. (3)\nFigure 8 shows the causal diagrams for computing the inﬂu-\nence reward in both the basic case (8a) and the MOA case (8b).\nBecause basic inﬂuence looks at inﬂuence between agents’\nactions in the same timestep, the diagram is much simpler.\nHowever, to avoid circular dependencies in the graph, it re-\nquires that agentk choose its action beforej, and therefore\nk can inﬂuencej butj cannot inﬂuencek. If there are more\nthan two agents, we assume a disjoint set of inﬂuencer and\ninﬂuencee agents, and all inﬂuencers must act ﬁrst.\n(a) Basic\n (b) MOA\nFigure 8: Causal diagrams of agentk’s effect onj’s action.\nShaded nodes are conditioned on, and we intervene onak\nt\n(blue node) by replacing it with counterfactuals. Nodes with\na green background must be modeled using the MOA module.\nNote that there is no backdoor path betweenak\nt andst in the\nMOA case, since it would require traversing a collider that is\nnot in the conditioning set.\nComputing inﬂuence across timesteps, as in the communica-\ntion and MOA experiments, complicates the causal diagram,\nbut ensures that each agent can inﬂuence every other agent.\nFigure 8b shows the diagram in the MOA case, in which we\ncan isolate the causal effect ofak\nt onaj\nt+1 because the back-\ndoor path throughst is blocked by the collider nodes atst+1\nanduj\nt+1 (Pearl et al., 2016). Note that it would be sufﬁcient\nto condition only onsk\nt in order to block all back-door paths\nin this case, but we show⟨uk\nt,sk\nt,aj\nt⟩ as shaded because all of\nthese are given as inputs to the MOA to help it predictaj\nt+1.\nFor the MOA to accurately estimatep(aj\nt+1|ak\nt,sk\nt ), it must\nmodel both the environment transition functionT , as well as\naspects of the internal LSTM state of the other agent,uj\nt+1,\nas shown by the shaded green variables in Figure 8b.\nThis is a simple case of counterfactual reasoning, that does\nnot require using abduction to update the probability of any\nunobserved variables (Pearl, 2013). This is because we have\nbuilt all relevant models, know all of their inputs, and can\neasily store the values for those variables at every step of the\ntrajectory in order to condition on them so that there are no\nunobserved variables that could act as a confounder.\n9. Conclusions and Future Work\nAll three experiments have shown that the proposed intrinsic\nsocial inﬂuence reward consistently leads to higher collec-\ntive return. Despite variation in the tasks, hyper-parameters,\nneural network architectures and experimental setups, the\nlearning curves for agents trained with the inﬂuence reward\n\n<!-- page: 9 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nare signiﬁcantly better than the curves of powerful agents\nsuch as A3C and their improved baselines. In some cases,\nit is clear that inﬂuence is essential to achieve any form of\nlearning, attesting to the promise of this idea and highlight-\ning the complexity of learning general deep neural network\nmulti-agent policies.\nExperiment I also showed that the inﬂuence reward can lead\nto the emergence of communication protocols. In experiment\nII, which included an explicit communication channel, we\nsaw that inﬂuence improved communication. Experiment\nIII showed that inﬂuence can be computed by augmenting\nagents with an internal model of other agents. The inﬂu-\nence reward can thus be computed without having access to\nanother agent’s reward function, or requiring a centralized\ncontroller. We were able to surpass state-of-the-art perfor-\nmance on the SSDs studied here, despite the fact that previous\nwork relied on agents’ ability to view other agents’ rewards.\nUsing counterfactuals to allow agents to understand the ef-\nfects of their actions on others is a promising approach with\nmany extensions. Agents could use counterfactuals to de-\nvelop a form of ‘empathy’, by simulating how their actions\naffect another agent’s value function. Inﬂuence could also\nbe used to drive coordinated behavior in robots attempting to\ndo cooperative manipulation and control tasks. Finally, if we\nview multi-agent networks as single agents, inﬂuence could\nbe used as a regularizer to encourage different modules of the\nnetwork to integrate information from other networks; for\nexample, to hopefully prevent collapse in hierarchical RL.\nAcknowledgements\nWe are grateful to Eugene Vinitsky for his help in reproduc-\ning the SSD environments in open source to improve the\nreplicability of the paper. We also thank Steven Wheelwright,\nNeil Rabinowitz, Thore Graepel, Alexander Novikov, Scott\nReed, Pedro Mediano, Jane Wang, Max Kleiman-Weiner, An-\ndrea Tacchetti, Kevin McKee, Yannick Schroecker, Matthias\nBauer, David Rolnick, Francis Song, David Budden, and\nCsaba Szepesvari, as well as everyone on the DeepMind\nMachine Learning and Multi-Agent teams for their helpful\ndiscussions and support.\nReferences\nBarton, S. L., Waytowich, N. R., Zaroukian, E., and\nAsher, D. E. Measuring collaborative emergent behav-\nior in multi-agent reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint\narXiv:1807.08663, 2018.\nBogin, B., Geva, M., and Berant, J. Emergence of commu-\nnication in an interactive world with consistent speakers.\narXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00549, 2018.\nCao, K., Lazaridou, A., Lanctot, M., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K.,\nand Clark, S. Emergent communication through negotia-\ntion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03980, 2018.\nCapdepuy, P., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. L. Maximization\nof potential information ﬂow as a universal utility for col-\nlective behaviour. InArtiﬁcial Life, 2007. ALIFE’07. IEEE\nSymposium on, pp. 207–213. Ieee, 2007.\nChoi, E., Lazaridou, A., and de Freitas, N. Compositional\nobverter communication learning from raw visual input.\narXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02341, 2018.\nCrandall, J. W., Oudah, M., Chenlinangjia, T., Ishowo-\nOloko, F., Abdallah, S., Bonnefon, J., Cebri´an, M., Shar-\niff, A., Goodrich, M. A., and Rahwan, I. Cooperating\nwith machines. CoRR, abs/1703.06207, 2017. URL\nhttp://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06207.\nCrawford, V . P. and Sobel, J. Strategic information transmis-\nsion. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,\npp. 1431–1451, 1982.\nDevlin, S., Yliniemi, L., Kudenko, D., and Tumer, K.\nPotential-based difference rewards for multiagent rein-\nforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2014 interna-\ntional conference on Autonomous agents and multi-agent\nsystems, pp. 165–172. International Foundation for Au-\ntonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2014.\nFerguson, H. J., Scheepers, C., and Sanford, A. J. Ex-\npectations in counterfactual and theory of mind reason-\ning. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(3):297–346,\n2010. doi: 10.1080/01690960903041174. URL https:\n//doi.org/10.1080/01690960903041174.\nFoerster, J., Assael, I. A., de Freitas, N., and Whiteson, S.\nLearning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforce-\nment learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-\ncessing Systems, pp. 2137–2145, 2016.\nFoerster, J., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and\nWhiteson, S. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients.\narXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08926, 2017.\nFoerster, J., Chen, R. Y ., Al-Shedivat, M., Whiteson, S.,\nAbbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. Learning with opponent-\nlearning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-\ntional Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent\nSystems, pp. 122–130. International Foundation for Au-\ntonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018.\nForestier, S. and Oudeyer, P.-Y . A uniﬁed model of speech\nand tool use early development. In 39th Annual Con-\nference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2017),\n2017.\nGers, F. A., Schmidhuber, J., and Cummins, F. Learning to\nforget: Continual prediction with lstm. 1999.\n\n<!-- page: 10 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nGuckelsberger, C., Salge, C., and Togelius, J. New\nand surprising ways to be mean. adversarial npcs with\ncoupled empowerment minimisation. arXiv preprint\narXiv:1806.01387, 2018.\nHarari, Y . N.Sapiens: A brief history of humankind. Random\nHouse, 2014.\nHenrich, J. The Secret of Our Success: How culture is driving\nhuman evolution, domesticating our species, and making\nus smart. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2015.\nURL http://press.princeton.edu/titles/\n10543.html.\nHerrmann, E., Call, J., Hern `andez-Lloreda, M. V ., Hare,\nB., and Tomasello, M. Humans have evolved spe-\ncialized skills of social cognition: The cultural intel-\nligence hypothesis. Science, 317(5843):1360–1366,\n2007. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.\n1146282. URL http://science.sciencemag.\norg/content/317/5843/1360.\nHughes, E., Leibo, J. Z., Phillips, M. G., Tuyls, K., Du´e˜nez-\nGuzm´an, E. A., Casta ˜neda, A. G., Dunning, I., Zhu, T.,\nMcKee, K. R., Koster, R., et al. Inequity aversion improves\ncooperation in intertemporal social dilemmas. InAdvances\nin neural information processing systems (NIPS), Mon-\ntreal, Canada, 2018.\nKlyubin, A. S., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. L. Empowerment:\nA universal agent-centric measure of control. In Evolu-\ntionary Computation, 2005. The 2005 IEEE Congress on,\nvolume 1, pp. 128–135. IEEE, 2005.\nLaland, K. N. Darwin’s unﬁnished symphony : how cul-\nture made the human mind / Kevin N. Laland. Princeton\nUniversity Press Princeton, 2017. ISBN 9781400884872\n140088487.\nLazaridou, A., Hermann, K. M., Tuyls, K., and Clark, S.\nEmergence of linguistic communication from referential\ngames with symbolic and pixel input. arXiv preprint\narXiv:1804.03984, 2018.\nLeibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V ., Lanctot, M., Marecki, J., and Grae-\npel, T. Multi-agent reinforcement learning in sequential\nsocial dilemmas. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference\non Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 464–\n473. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and\nMultiagent Systems, 2017.\nLiu, B., Singh, S., Lewis, R. L., and Qin, S. Optimal rewards\nfor cooperative agents.IEEE Transactions on Autonomous\nMental Development, 6(4):286–297, 2014.\nLizier, J. T. and Prokopenko, M. Differentiating information\ntransfer and causal effect. The European Physical Journal\nB, 73(4):605–615, 2010.\nLowe, R., Wu, Y ., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, O. P., and Mor-\ndatch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-\ncompetitive environments. In Advances in Neural Infor-\nmation Processing Systems, pp. 6379–6390, 2017.\nMelis, A. P. and Semmann, D. How is human cooperation\ndifferent? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\nof London B: Biological Sciences, 365(1553):2663–2674,\n2010.\nMnih, V ., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T.,\nHarley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous\nmethods for deep reinforcement learning. InInternational\nconference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937, 2016.\nMohamed, S. and Rezende, D. J. Variational information\nmaximisation for intrinsically motivated reinforcement\nlearning. In Advances in neural information processing\nsystems, pp. 2125–2133, 2015.\nOudeyer, P.-Y . and Kaplan, F. Discovering communication.\nConnection Science, 18(2):189–206, 2006.\nOudeyer, P.-Y . and Smith, L. B. How evolution may work\nthrough curiosity-driven developmental process.Topics\nin Cognitive Science, 8(2):492–502, 2016.\nPathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T.\nCuriosity-driven exploration by self-supervised predic-\ntion. In International Conference on Machine Learning\n(ICML), volume 2017, 2017.\nPearl, J. Structural counterfactuals: A brief introduction.\nCognitive science, 37(6):977–985, 2013.\nPearl, J., Glymour, M., and Jewell, N. P.Causal inference in\nstatistics: a primer. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.\nPerolat, J., Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V ., Beattie, C., Tuyls,\nK., and Graepel, T. A multi-agent reinforcement learn-\ning model of common-pool resource appropriation. In\nAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.\n3643–3652, 2017.\nPeysakhovich, A. and Lerer, A. Consequentialist conditional\ncooperation in social dilemmas with imperfect informa-\ntion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06975, 2017.\nPeysakhovich, A. and Lerer, A. Prosocial learning agents\nsolve generalized stag hunts better than selﬁsh ones. In\nProceedings of the 17th International Conference on Au-\ntonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 2043–2044.\nInternational Foundation for Autonomous Agents and\nMultiagent Systems, 2018.\nRabinowitz, N. C., Perbet, F., Song, H. F., Zhang, C., Eslami,\nS., and Botvinick, M. Machine theory of mind. arXiv\npreprint arXiv:1802.07740, 2018.\n\n<!-- page: 11 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nSchelling, T. C. Hockey helmets, concealed weapons, and\ndaylight saving: A study of binary choices with exter-\nnalities. Journal of Conﬂict resolution, 17(3):381–428,\n1973.\nSchmidhuber, J. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and in-\ntrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Transactions on\nAutonomous Mental Development, 2(3):230–247, 2010.\nSequeira, P., Melo, F. S., Prada, R., and Paiva, A. Emerging\nsocial awareness: Exploring intrinsic motivation in mul-\ntiagent learning. In Development and Learning (ICDL),\n2011 IEEE International Conference on, volume 2, pp.\n1–6. IEEE, 2011.\nSingh, S. P., Barto, A. G., and Chentanez, N. Intrinsically\nmotivated reinforcement learning. InAdvances in Neural\nInformation Processing Systems 17 [Neural Information\nProcessing Systems, NIPS 2004, December 13-18, 2004,\nVancouver, British Columbia, Canada], pp. 1281–1288,\n2004.\nStavropoulos, K. K. and Carver, L. J. Research review: social\nmotivation and oxytocin in autism–implications for joint\nattention development and intervention.Journal of Child\nPsychology and Psychiatry, 54(6):603–618, 2013.\nStrouse, D., Kleiman-Weiner, M., Tenenbaum, J., Botvinick,\nM., and Schwab, D. Learning to share and hide inten-\ntions using information regularization. arXiv preprint\narXiv:1808.02093, 2018.\nTajima, S., Yanagawa, T., Fujii, N., and Toyoizumi, T.\nUntangling brain-wide dynamics in consciousness by\ncross-embedding. PLoS computational biology, 11(11):\ne1004537, 2015.\nTomasello, M. Why we cooperate. MIT press, 2009.\nvan Schaik, C. P. and Burkart, J. M. Social learning and evo-\nlution: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. Philosophical\nTransactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,\n366(1567):1008–1016, 2011.\nvon Frisch, K. The dance language and orientation of bees.\n5, 06 1969.\nYu, C., Zhang, M., and Ren, F. Emotional multiagent rein-\nforcement learning in social dilemmas. InInternational\nConference on Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent\nSystems, pp. 372–387. Springer, 2013.\n10. Supplementary Material\n10.1. Inﬂuence as Mutual Information\nThe causal inﬂuence of agentk on agentj is:\nDKL\n[\np(aj\nt|ak\nt,zt)\np(aj\nt|zt)\n]\n, (4)\nwherezt represents all relevantu ands background variables\nat timestept. The inﬂuence reward to the mutual information\n(MI) between the actions of agentsk andj, which is given by\nI(Aj;Ak|z) =\n∑\nak,aj\np(aj,ak|z)log p(aj,ak|z)\np(aj|z)p(ak|z)\n=\n∑\nak\np(ak|z)DKL\n[\np(aj|ak,z)\np(aj|z)\n]\n, (5)\nwhere we see that the DKL factor in Eq. 5 is the causal\ninﬂuence reward given in Eq. 4.\nBy samplingN independent trajectoriesτn from the environ-\nment, wherek’s actionsak\nn are drawn according top(ak|z),\nwe perform a Monte-Carlo approximation of the MI (see e.g.\nStrouse et al. (2018)),\nI(Ak;Aj|z) =Eτ\n[\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|Ak,z)\np(Aj|z)\n]⏐⏐⏐z\n]\n≈ 1\nN\n∑\nn\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|ak\nn,z)\np(Aj|z)\n]\n. (6)\nThus, in expectation, the social inﬂuence reward is the MI\nbetween agents’ actions.\nWhether the policy trained with Eq. 4 actually learns to ap-\nproximate the MI depends on the learning dynamics. We\ncalculate the intrinsic social inﬂuence reward using Eq. 4, be-\ncause unlike Eq. 5, which gives an estimate of the symmetric\nbandwidth betweenk andj, Eq. 4 gives the directed causal\neffect of the speciﬁc action taken by agentk,ak\nt . We believe\nthis will result in an easier reward to learn, since it allows for\nbetter credit assignment; agentk can more easily learn which\nof its actions lead to high inﬂuence.\nThe connection to mutual information is interesting, because\na frequently used intrinsic motivation for single agent RL\nis empowerment, which rewards the agent for having high\nmutual information between its actions and the future state\nof the environment (e.g. Klyubin et al. (2005); Capdepuy\net al. (2007)). To the extent that the social inﬂuence reward\napproximates the MI,k is rewarded for having empowerment\noverj’s actions.\nThe social inﬂuence reward can also be computed using\nother divergence measures besides KL-divergence. Lizier &\nProkopenko (2010) proposelocal information ﬂowas a mea-\nsure of direct causal effect; this is equivalent to thepointwise\nmutual information (the innermost term of Eq. 6), given by:\npmi(ak;aj|Z =z) = logp(aj|ak,z)\np(aj|z)\n= log p(ak,aj|z)\np(ak|z)p(aj|z). (7)\nThe PMI gives us a measure of inﬂuence of a single action of\nk on the single action taken byj. The expectation of the PMI\n\n<!-- page: 12 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\noverp(aj,ak|z) is the MI. We experiment with using the PMI\nand a number of divergence measures, including the Jensen-\nShannon Divergence (JSD), and ﬁnd that the inﬂuence reward\nis robust to the choice of measure.\n10.2. Sequential Social Dilemmas\nFigure 9 depicts the SSD games under investigation. In each\nof the games, an agent is rewarded +1 for every apple it\ncollects, but the apples are a limited resource. Agents have\nthe ability to punish each other with a ﬁning beam, which\ncosts−1 reward to ﬁre, and ﬁnes any agent it hits−50 reward.\nIn Cleanup (a public goods game) agents must clean a\nriver before apples can grow, but are not able to harvest\napples while cleaning. InHarvest (a common pool resource\ngame), apples respawn at a rate proportional to the amount\nof nearby apples; if apples are harvested too quickly, they\nwill not grow back. Both coordination, and cooperation\nare required to solve both games. In Cleanup, agents\nmust efﬁciently time harvesting apples and cleaning\nthe river, and allow agents cleaning the river a chance\nto consume apples. In Harvest, agents must spatially\ndistribute their harvesting, and abstain from consuming\napples too quickly in order to harvest sustainably. The\ncode for these games, including hyperparameter settings\nand apple and waste respawn probabilities, can be found\nat https://github.com/eugenevinitsky/\nsequential_social_dilemma_games.\nThe reward structure of the games is shown in Figure 10,\nwhich gives the Schelling diagram for both SSD tasks under\ninvestigation. A Schelling diagram (Schelling, 1973; Perolat\net al., 2017) depicts the relative payoffs for a single agent’s\nstrategy given a ﬁxed number of other agents who are coop-\nerative. These diagrams show that all agents would beneﬁt\nfrom learning to cooperate, because even the agents that are\nbeing exploited get higher reward than in the regime where\nall agents defect. However, traditional RL agents struggle to\nlearn to cooperate and solve these tasks effectively (Hughes\net al., 2018).\n10.3. Additional experiment - Box Trapped\nAs a proof-of-concept experiment to test whether the inﬂu-\nence reward works as expected, we constructed a special\nenvironment, shown in Figure 11. In this environment, one\nagent (teal) is trapped in a box. The other agent (purple) has\na special action it can use to open the box... or it can simply\nchoose to consume apples, which exist outside the box and\nare inexhaustible in this environment.\nAs expected, a vanilla A3C agent learns to act selﬁshly; the\npurple agent will simply consume apples, and chooses the\nopen box action in 0% of trajectories once the policy has con-\nverged. A video of A3C agents trained in this environment\nis available at: https://youtu.be/C8SE9_YKzxI,\nwhich shows that the purple agent leaves its compatriot\ntrapped in the box throughout the trajectory.\nIn contrast, an agent trained with the social inﬂuence re-\nward chooses the open box action in 88% of trajectories,\nreleasing its fellow agent so that they are both able to\nconsume apples. A video of this behavior is shown at:\nhttps://youtu.be/Gfo248-qt3c. Further, as Fig-\nure 12 reveals, the purple inﬂuencer agent usually chooses to\nopen the box within the ﬁrst few steps of the trajetory, giving\nits fellow agent more time to collect reward.\nMost importantly though, Figure 13 shows the inﬂuence\nreward over the course of a trajectory in the Box trapped\nenvironment. The agent chooses theopen box action in the\nsecond timestep; at this point, we see a corresponding spike\nin the inﬂuence reward. This reveals that the inﬂuence reward\nworks as expected, incentivizing an action which has a strong\n— and in this case, prosocial — effect on the other agent’s\nbehavior.\n10.4. Implementation details\nAll models are trained with a single convolutional layer with\na kernel of size 3, stride of size 1, and 6 output channels.\nThis is connected to two fully connected layers of size 32\neach, and an LSTM with 128 cells. We use a discount factor\nγ =.99. The number of agentsN is ﬁxed to 5.\nIn addition to the comparison function used to compute inﬂu-\nence (e.g. KL-divergence, PMI, JSD), there are many other\nhyperparameters that can be tuned for each model. We use a\nrandom search over hyperparameters, ensuring a fair compar-\nison with the search size over the baseline parameters that are\nshared with the inﬂuence models. For all models we search\nfor the optimal entropy reward and learning rate, where we\nanneal the learning rate from an initial value lr init to\nlr final. The below sections give the parameters found\nto be most effective for each of the three experiments.\n10.4.1. B ASIC INFLUENCE HYPERPARAMETERS\nIn this setting we vary the number of inﬂuencers from1−4,\nthe inﬂuence reward weightβ, and the number of curriculum\nsteps over which the weight of the inﬂuence reward is lin-\nearly increasedC. In this setting, since we have a centralised\ncontroller, we also experiment with giving the inﬂuence re-\nward to the agent being inﬂuenced as well, and ﬁnd that this\nsometimes helps. This ‘inﬂuencee’ reward is not used in the\nother two experiments, since it precludes independent train-\ning. The hyperparameters found to give the best performance\nfor each model are shown in Table 1.\n\n<!-- page: 13 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nFigure 9: The two SSD environments, Cleanup (left) and Harvest (right). Agents can exploit other agents for immediate\npayoff, but at the expense of the long-term collective reward of the group. Reproduced with permission from Hughes et al.\n(2018).\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 10: Schelling diagrams for the two social dilemma tasks show that an individual agent is motivated to defect, though\neveryone beneﬁts when more agents cooperate. Reproduced with permission from Hughes et al. (2018).\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .000248 .000687 .00184 .00025\nlr init .00126 .00126 .00107 .00136 .00215 .00107\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000042 .000028 .000013 .000042\nNumber of inﬂuencers - 3 1 - 3 3\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .146 - 0 .224\nCurriculumC - - 140 - - 140\nPolicy comparison - - JSD - - PMI\nInﬂuencee reward - - 1 - - 0\nTable 1: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the basic inﬂuence experiment.\nFigure 11: The Box trapped environment in which the teal\nagent is trapped, and the purple agent can release it with a\nspecial open box action.\n10.4.2. C OMMUNICATION HYPERPARAMETERS\nBecause the communication models have an extra A2C out-\nput head for the communication policy, we use an additional\nentropy regularization term just for this head, and apply a\nweight to the communication loss in the loss function. We\nalso vary the number of communication symbols that the\nagents can emit, and the size of the linear layer that connects\nthe LSTM to the communication policy layer, which we term\nthe communication embedding size. Finally, in the commu-\nnication regime, we experiment to setting the weight on the\nextrinsic reward E,α, to zero. The best hyperparameters for\neach of the communication models are shown in Table 2.\n10.4.3. M ODEL OF OTHER AGENTS (MOA)\nHYPERPARAMETERS\nThe MOA hyperparameters include whether to only train the\nMOA with cross-entropy loss on the actions of agents that\nare visible, and how much to weight the supervised loss in\nthe overall loss of the model. The best hyperparameters are\nshown in Table 3.\n\n<!-- page: 14 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nA3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nEntropy reg. .00176 .000249 .00305 .000687 .000174 .00220\nlr init .00126 .00223 .00249 .00136 .00137 .000413\nlr end .000012 .000022 .0000127 .000028 .0000127 .000049\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 2.752 - 0 4.825\nExtrinsic reward\nweightα - - 0 - - 1.0\nCurriculumC - - 1 - - 8\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nComm. entropy reg. - - .000789 - - .00208\nComm. loss weight - - .0758 - - .0709\nSymbol vocab size - - 9 - - 7\nComm. embedding - - 32 - - 16\nTable 2: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the communication experiment.\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nA3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .00176 .000687 .00495 .00223\nlr init .00126 .00123 .00123 .00136 .00206 .00120\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000012 .000028 .000022 .000044\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .620 - 0 2.521\nMOA loss weight - 1.312 15.007 - 1.711 10.911\nCurriculumC - - 40 - - 226\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nTrain MOA only\nwhen visible - False True - False True\nTable 3: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the model of other agents (MOA) experiment.\nFigure 12: Number of times the open box action occurs at\neach trajectory step over 100 trajectories.\nFigure 13: Inﬂuence reward over a trajectory inBox trapped.\nAn agent gets high inﬂuence for letting another agent out of\nthe box in which it is trapped.\n10.4.4. C OMMUNICATION ANALYSIS\nThe speaker consistency metric is calculated as:\nN∑\nk=1\n0.5[\n∑\nc\n1−H(p(ak|mk =c))\nHmax\n+\n∑\na\n1−H(p(mk|ak =a))\nHmax\n], (8)\n\n<!-- page: 15 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nwhereH is the entropy function andHmax is the maximum\nentropy based on the number of discrete symbols or actions.\nThe goal of the metric is to measure how much of a 1:1\ncorrespondence exists between a speaker’s action and the\nspeaker’s communication message.\n10.5. Additional results\n10.5.1. BASIC INFLUENCE EMERGENT COMMUNICATION\nFigure 14 shows an additional moment of high inﬂuence in\nthe Cleanup game. The purple inﬂuencer agent can see the\narea within the white box, and therefore all of the apple patch.\nThe ﬁeld-of-view of the magenta inﬂuencee is outlined with\nthe magenta box; it cannot see if apples have appeared, even\nthough it has been cleaning the river, which is the action re-\nquired to cause apples to appear. When the purple inﬂuencer\nturns left and does not move towards the apple patch, this\nsignals to the magenta agent that no apples have appeared,\nsince otherwise the inﬂuence would move right.\nFigure 14: A moment of high inﬂuence between the purple\ninﬂuencer and magenta inﬂuencee.\n10.5.2. O PTIMIZING FOR COLLECTIVE REWARD\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Tragedy\nFigure 15: Total collective reward obtained by agents trained\nto optimize for the collective reward, for the 5 best hyperpa-\nrameter settings with 5 random seeds each. Error bars show\na 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding\nwindow of 200 agent steps.\nIn this section we include the results of training explicitly\nprosocial agents, which directly optimize for the collective\nreward of all agents. Previous work (e.g. Peysakhovich &\nLerer (2018)) has shown that training agents to optimize\nfor the rewards of other agents can help the group to obtain\nbetter collective outcomes. Following a similar principle, we\nimplemented agents that optimize for a convex combination\nof their own individual rewardek\nt and the collective reward\nof all other agents,∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. Thus, the reward function\nfor agentk isrk\nt =ek\nt +η∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. We conducted the\nsame hyperparameter search over the parameters mentioned\nin Section 10.4.1 varying the weight placed on the collective\nreward,η∈ [0,2].\nAs expected, we ﬁnd that agents trained to optimize for col-\nlective reward attain higher collective reward in bothCleanup\nand Harvest, as is shown in Figure 15. In both games, the\noptimal value forη = 0.85. Interestingly, however, the equal-\nity in the individual returns for these agents is extremely low.\nAcross the hyperparameter sweep, no solution to theCleanup\ngame which scored more than 20 points in terms of collective\nreturn was found in which all agents scored an individual\nreturn above 0. It seems that in Cleanup, when agents are\ntrained to optimize for collective return, they converge on a\nsolution in which some agents never receive any reward.\nNote that training agents to optimize for collective reward\nrequires that each agent can view the rewards obtained by\nother agents. As discussed previously, the social inﬂuence\nreward is a novel way to obtain cooperative behavior, that\ndoes not require making this assumption.\n10.5.3. C OLLECTIVE REWARD AND EQUALITY\nIt is important to note that collective reward is not always the\nperfect metric of cooperative behavior, a ﬁnding that was also\ndiscovered by Barton et al. (2018) and emphasized by Leibo\net al. (2017). In the case, we ﬁnd that there is a spurious\nsolution to the Harvest game, in which one agent fails to\nlearn and fails to collect any apples. This leads to very high\ncollective reward, since it means there is one fewer agent\nthat can exploit the others, and makes sustainable harvesting\neasier to achieve. Therefore, for the results shown in the\npaper, we eliminate any random seed inHarvest for which\none of the agents has failed to learn to collect apples, as in\nprevious work (Hughes et al., 2018).\nHowever, here we also present an alternative strategy for\nassessing the overall collective outcomes: weighting the total\ncollective reward by an index of equality of the individual\nrewards. Speciﬁcally, we compute the Gini coefﬁcient over\ntheN agents’ individual environmental rewardsek\nt :\nG =\n∑N\ni=1\n∑N\nj=1|ei\nt−ej\nt|\n2N∑N\ni=1ei\nt\n, (9)\n\n<!-- page: 16 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nwhich gives us a measure of the inequality of the returns,\nwhereG∈ [0,1], withG = 0indicating perfect equality. Thus,\n1−G is a measure of equality; we use this to weight the\ncollective reward for each experiment, and plot the results in\nFigure 16. Once again, we see that the inﬂuence models give\nthe highest ﬁnal performance, even with this new metric.\n10.5.4. C OLLECTIVE REWARD OVER MULTIPLE\nHYPERPARAMETERS\nFinally, we would like to show that the inﬂuence reward is\nrobust to the choice of hyperparameter settings. Therefore,\nin Figure 17, we plot the collective reward of the top 5 best\nhyperparameter settings for each experiment, over 5 random\nseeds each. Once again, the inﬂuence models result in higher\ncollective reward, which provides evidence that the model is\nrobust to the choice of hyperparameters.\n10.5.5. PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN MODELS\nAND RELATED WORK\nTable 4 presents the ﬁnal collective reward obtained by each\nof the models tested in the experiments presented in the\npaper. We see that in several cases, the inﬂuence agents are\neven able to out-perform the state-of-the-art results on these\ntasks reported by (Hughes et al., 2018), despite the fact that\nthe solution proposed by (Hughes et al., 2018) requires that\nagents can view other agents’ rewards, whereas we do not\nmake this assumption, and instead only require that agents\ncan view each others’ actions.\nCleanup Harvest\nA3C baseline 89 485\nInequity aversion (Hughes et al.) 275 750\nInﬂuence - Basic 190 1073\nInﬂuence - Communication 166 951\nInﬂuence - Model of other agents 392 588\nTable 4: Final collective reward over the last 50 agent steps\nfor each of the models considered. Bolded entries represent\nexperiments in which the inﬂuence models signiﬁcantly out-\nperformed the scores reported in previous work oninequity\naversion (Hughes et al., 2018). This is impressive, consid-\nering the inequity averse agents are able to view all other\nagents’ rewards. We make no such assumption, and yet are\nable to achieve similar or superior performance.\n\n<!-- page: 17 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 16: Total collective reward times equality,R∗(1−G), obtained in all experiments. Error bars show a 99.5% conﬁdence\ninterval (CI) over 5 random seeds, computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. Once again, the models trained with\ninﬂuence reward (red) signiﬁcantly outperform the baseline and ablated models.\n\n<!-- page: 18 -->\n\nSocial Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 17: Total collective reward over the top 5 hyperparameter settings, with 5 random seeds each, for all experiments. Error\nbars show a 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. The inﬂuence models\nstill maintain an advantage over the baselines and ablated models, suggesting the technique is robust to the hyperparameter\nsettings.\n\n<!-- page: 19 -->\n\n000\n001\n002\n003\n004\n005\n006\n007\n008\n009\n010\n011\n012\n013\n014\n015\n016\n017\n018\n019\n020\n021\n022\n023\n024\n025\n026\n027\n028\n029\n030\n031\n032\n033\n034\n035\n036\n037\n038\n039\n040\n041\n042\n043\n044\n045\n046\n047\n048\n049\n050\n051\n052\n053\n054\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation\nfor Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning\nAnonymous Authors1\n1. Inﬂuence as Mutual Information\nThe causal inﬂuence of agentk on agentj is:\nDKL\n[\np(aj\nt|ak\nt,zt)\np(aj\nt|zt)\n]\n, (1)\nwherezt represents the conditioning variables at timestep\nt,zt =⟨uj\nt,sj\nt⟩. The inﬂuence reward to the mutual infor-\nmation (MI) between the actions of agentsk andj, which\nis given by\nI(Aj;Ak|z) =\n∑\nak,aj\np(aj,ak|z) log p(aj,ak|z)\np(aj|z)p(ak|z)\n=\n∑\nak\np(ak|z)DKL\n[\np(aj|ak,z )\np(aj|z)\n]\n,\n(2)\nwhere we see that the DKL factor in Eq. 2 is the causal\ninﬂuence reward given in Eq. 1.\nBy sampling N independent trajectories τn from the en-\nvironment, where k’s actionsak\nn are drawn according to\np(ak|z), we perform a Monte-Carlo approximation of the\nMI (see e.g. ?),\nI(Ak;Aj|z) = Eτ\n[\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|Ak,z )\np(Aj|z)\n]⏐⏐⏐z\n]\n≈ 1\nN\n∑\nn\nDKL\n[\np(Aj|ak\nn,z )\np(Aj|z)\n]\n. (3)\nThus, in expectation, the social inﬂuence reward is the MI\nbetween agents’ actions.\nWhether the policy trained with Eq. 1 actually learns to\napproximate the MI depends on the learning dynamics. We\ncalculate the intrinsic social inﬂuence reward using Eq. 1,\nbecause unlike Eq. 2, which gives an estimate of the sym-\nmetric bandwidth betweenk andj, Eq. 1 gives the directed\ncausal effect of the speciﬁc action taken by agentk,ak\nt . We\n1Anonymous Institution, Anonymous City, Anonymous Region,\nAnonymous Country. Correspondence to: Anonymous Author\n<anon.email@domain.com>.\nPreliminary work. Under review by the International Conference\non Machine Learning (ICML). Do not distribute.\nbelieve this will result in an easier reward to learn, since it\nallows for better credit assignment; agentk can more easily\nlearn which of its actions lead to high inﬂuence.\nThe connection to mutual information is interesting, because\na frequently used intrinsic motivation for single agent RL\nis empowerment, which rewards the agent for having high\nmutual information between its actions and the future state\nof the environment (e.g. ??). To the extent that the social\ninﬂuence reward approximates the MI, k is rewarded for\nhaving empowerment overj’s actions.\nThe social inﬂuence reward can also be computed using\nother divergence measures besides KL-divergence. ? pro-\npose local information ﬂow as a measure of direct causal\neffect; this is equivalent to thepointwise mutual information\n(the innermost term of Eq. 3), given by:\npmi(ak;aj|Z =z) = log p(aj|ak,z )\np(aj|z)\n= log p(ak,aj|z)\np(ak|z)p(aj|z). (4)\nThe PMI gives us a measure of inﬂuence of a single action\nofk on the single action taken byj. The expectation of the\nPMI overp(aj,ak|z) is the MI. We experiment with using\nthe PMI and a number of divergence measures, including\nthe Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD), and ﬁnd that the\ninﬂuence reward is robust to the choice of measure.\n2. Sequential Social Dilemmas\nFigure 1 depicts the SSD games under investigation. In\neach of the games, an agent is rewarded +1 for every apple\nit collects, but the apples are a limited resource. Agents\nhave the ability to punish each other with a ﬁning beam,\nwhich costs−1 reward to ﬁre, and ﬁnes any agent it hits\n−50 reward.\nIn Cleanup (a public goods game) agents must clean a\nriver before apples can grow, but are not able to harvest\napples while cleaning. In Harvest (a common pool resource\ngame), apples respawn at a rate proportional to the amount\nof nearby apples; if apples are harvested too quickly, they\nwill not grow back. Both coordination, and cooperation\nare required to solve both games. In Cleanup, agents\narXiv:1810.08647v4  [cs.LG]  18 Jun 2019\n\n<!-- page: 20 -->\n\n055\n056\n057\n058\n059\n060\n061\n062\n063\n064\n065\n066\n067\n068\n069\n070\n071\n072\n073\n074\n075\n076\n077\n078\n079\n080\n081\n082\n083\n084\n085\n086\n087\n088\n089\n090\n091\n092\n093\n094\n095\n096\n097\n098\n099\n100\n101\n102\n103\n104\n105\n106\n107\n108\n109\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nFigure 1: The two SSD environments, Cleanup (left) and Harvest (right). Agents can exploit other agents for immediate\npayoff, but at the expense of the long-term collective reward of the group. Reproduced with permission from ?.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Harvest\nFigure 2: Schelling diagrams for the two social dilemma tasks show that an individual agent is motivated to defect, though\neveryone beneﬁts when more agents cooperate. Reproduced with permission from ?.\nmust efﬁciently time harvesting apples and cleaning\nthe river, and allow agents cleaning the river a chance\nto consume apples. In Harvest, agents must spatially\ndistribute their harvesting, and abstain from consuming\napples too quickly in order to harvest sustainably. The\ncode for these games, including hyperparameter settings\nand apple and waste respawn probabilities, can be found\nat https://github.com/eugenevinitsky/\nsequential_social_dilemma_games.\nThe reward structure of the games is shown in Figure 2,\nwhich gives the Schelling diagram for both SSD tasks under\ninvestigation. A Schelling diagram (??) depicts the relative\npayoffs for a single agent’s strategy given a ﬁxed number\nof other agents who are cooperative. These diagrams show\nthat all agents would beneﬁt from learning to cooperate,\nbecause even the agents that are being exploited get higher\nreward than in the regime where all agents defect. However,\ntraditional RL agents struggle to learn to cooperate and solve\nthese tasks effectively (?).\n3. Additional experiment - Box Trapped\nAs a proof-of-concept experiment to test whether the inﬂu-\nence reward works as expected, we constructed a special\nenvironment, shown in Figure 3. In this environment, one\nagent (teal) is trapped in a box. The other agent (purple) has\na special action it can use to open the box... or it can simply\nchoose to consume apples, which exist outside the box and\nare inexhaustible in this environment.\nAs expected, a vanilla A3C agent learns to act selﬁshly; the\nFigure 3: The Box trapped environment in which the teal\nagent is trapped, and the purple agent can release it with a\nspecial open box action.\npurple agent will simply consume apples, and chooses the\nopen box action in 0% of trajectories once the policy has con-\nverged. A video of A3C agents trained in this environment\nis available at: https://youtu.be/C8SE9_YKzxI,\nwhich shows that the purple agent leaves its compatriot\ntrapped in the box throughout the trajectory.\nIn contrast, an agent trained with the social inﬂuence re-\nward chooses the open box action in 88% of trajectories,\nreleasing its fellow agent so that they are both able to\nconsume apples. A video of this behavior is shown at:\nhttps://youtu.be/Gfo248-qt3c. Further, as Fig-\nure 4 reveals, the purple inﬂuencer agent usually chooses\nto open the box within the ﬁrst few steps of the trajetory,\ngiving its fellow agent more time to collect reward.\nMost importantly though, Figure 5 shows the inﬂuence re-\n\n<!-- page: 21 -->\n\n110\n111\n112\n113\n114\n115\n116\n117\n118\n119\n120\n121\n122\n123\n124\n125\n126\n127\n128\n129\n130\n131\n132\n133\n134\n135\n136\n137\n138\n139\n140\n141\n142\n143\n144\n145\n146\n147\n148\n149\n150\n151\n152\n153\n154\n155\n156\n157\n158\n159\n160\n161\n162\n163\n164\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nward over the course of a trajectory in the Box trapped\nenvironment. The agent chooses the open box action in\nthe second timestep; at this point, we see a corresponding\nspike in the inﬂuence reward. This reveals that the inﬂuence\nreward works as expected, incentivizing an action which\nhas a strong — and in this case, prosocial — effect on the\nother agent’s behavior.\nFigure 4: Number of times the open box action occurs at\neach trajectory step over 100 trajectories.\nFigure 5: Inﬂuence reward over a trajectory in Box trapped.\nAn agent gets high inﬂuence for letting another agent out of\nthe box in which it is trapped.\n4. Implementation details\nAll models are trained with a single convolutional layer with\na kernel of size 3, stride of size 1, and 6 output channels.\nThis is connected to two fully connected layers of size 32\neach, and an LSTM with 128 cells. We use a discount factor\nγ =.99. The number of agentsN is ﬁxed to 5.\nIn addition to the comparison function used to compute\ninﬂuence (e.g. KL-divergence, PMI, JSD), there are many\nother hyperparameters that can be tuned for each model.\nWe use a random search over hyperparameters, ensuring\na fair comparison with the search size over the baseline\nparameters that are shared with the inﬂuence models. For\nall models we search for the optimal entropy reward and\nlearning rate, where we anneal the learning rate from an\ninitial value lr init to lr final. The below sections\ngive the parameters found to be most effective for each of\nthe three experiments.\n4.1. Basic inﬂuence hyperparameters\nIn this setting we vary the number of inﬂuencers from 1− 4,\nthe inﬂuence reward weightβ, and the number of curricu-\nlum steps over which the weight of the inﬂuence reward\nis linearly increased C. In this setting, since we have a\ncentralised controller, we also experiment with giving the\ninﬂuence reward to the agent being inﬂuenced as well, and\nﬁnd that this sometimes helps. This ‘inﬂuencee’ reward is\nnot used in the other two experiments, since it precludes\nindependent training. The hyperparameters found to give\nthe best performance for each model are shown in Table 1.\n4.2. Communication hyperparameters\nBecause the communication models have an extra A2C out-\nput head for the communication policy, we use an additional\nentropy regularization term just for this head, and apply a\nweight to the communication loss in the loss function. We\nalso vary the number of communication symbols that the\nagents can emit, and the size of the linear layer that con-\nnects the LSTM to the communication policy layer, which\nwe term the communication embedding size. Finally, in the\ncommunication regime, we experiment to setting the weight\non the extrinsic reward E,α, to zero. The best hyperparam-\neters for each of the communication models are shown in\nTable 2.\n4.3. Model of other agents (MOA) hyperparameters\nThe MOA hyperparameters include whether to only train\nthe MOA with cross-entropy loss on the actions of agents\nthat are visible, and how much to weight the supervised loss\nin the overall loss of the model. The best hyperparameters\nare shown in Table 3.\n4.4. Communication analysis\nThe speaker consistency metric is calculated as:\nN∑\nk=1\n0.5[\n∑\nc\n1− H(p(ak|mk =c))\nHmax\n+\n∑\na\n1− H(p(mk|ak =a))\nHmax\n], (5)\nwhereH is the entropy function andHmax is the maximum\nentropy based on the number of discrete symbols or actions.\n\n<!-- page: 22 -->\n\n165\n166\n167\n168\n169\n170\n171\n172\n173\n174\n175\n176\n177\n178\n179\n180\n181\n182\n183\n184\n185\n186\n187\n188\n189\n190\n191\n192\n193\n194\n195\n196\n197\n198\n199\n200\n201\n202\n203\n204\n205\n206\n207\n208\n209\n210\n211\n212\n213\n214\n215\n216\n217\n218\n219\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence A3C\nbaseline\nVisible actions\nbaseline Inﬂuence\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .000248 .000687 .00184 .00025\nlr init .00126 .00126 .00107 .00136 .00215 .00107\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000042 .000028 .000013 .000042\nNumber of inﬂuencers - 3 1 - 3 3\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .146 - 0 .224\nCurriculumC - - 140 - - 140\nPolicy comparison - - JSD - - PMI\nInﬂuencee reward - - 1 - - 0\nTable 1: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the basic inﬂuence experiment.\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nA3C\nbaseline\nComm.\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\ncomm.\nEntropy reg. .00176 .000249 .00305 .000687 .000174 .00220\nlr init .00126 .00223 .00249 .00136 .00137 .000413\nlr end .000012 .000022 .0000127 .000028 .0000127 .000049\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 2.752 - 0 4.825\nExtrinsic reward\nweightα - - 0 - - 1.0\nCurriculumC - - 1 - - 8\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nComm. entropy reg. - - .000789 - - .00208\nComm. loss weight - - .0758 - - .0709\nSymbol vocab size - - 9 - - 7\nComm. embedding - - 32 - - 16\nTable 2: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the communication experiment.\nThe goal of the metric is to measure how much of a 1:1\ncorrespondence exists between a speaker’s action and the\nspeaker’s communication message.\n5. Additional results\n5.1. Basic inﬂuence emergent communication\nFigure 6 shows an additional moment of high inﬂuence in\nthe Cleanup game. The purple inﬂuencer agent can see the\narea within the white box, and therefore all of the apple\npatch. The ﬁeld-of-view of the magenta inﬂuencee is out-\nlined with the magenta box; it cannot see if apples have\nappeared, even though it has been cleaning the river, which\nis the action required to cause apples to appear. When the\npurple inﬂuencer turns left and does not move towards the\napple patch, this signals to the magenta agent that no apples\nhave appeared, since otherwise the inﬂuence would move\nright.\n5.2. Optimizing for collective reward\nIn this section we include the results of training explicitly\nprosocial agents, which directly optimize for the collective\nreward of all agents. Previous work (e.g. ?) has shown that\ntraining agents to optimize for the rewards of other agents\ncan help the group to obtain better collective outcomes.\nFigure 6: A moment of high inﬂuence between the purple\ninﬂuencer and magenta inﬂuencee.\nFollowing a similar principle, we implemented agents that\noptimize for a convex combination of their own individual\nreward ek\nt and the collective reward of all other agents,∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. Thus, the reward function for agentk isrk\nt =\nek\nt +η∑N\ni=1,i̸=kei\nt. We conducted the same hyperparameter\nsearch over the parameters mentioned in Section 4.1 varying\nthe weight placed on the collective reward,η∈ [0, 2].\nAs expected, we ﬁnd that agents trained to optimize for\ncollective reward attain higher collective reward in both\n\n<!-- page: 23 -->\n\n220\n221\n222\n223\n224\n225\n226\n227\n228\n229\n230\n231\n232\n233\n234\n235\n236\n237\n238\n239\n240\n241\n242\n243\n244\n245\n246\n247\n248\n249\n250\n251\n252\n253\n254\n255\n256\n257\n258\n259\n260\n261\n262\n263\n264\n265\n266\n267\n268\n269\n270\n271\n272\n273\n274\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nHyperparameter A3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nA3C\nbaseline\nMOA\nbaseline\nInﬂuence\nMOA\nEntropy reg. .00176 .00176 .00176 .000687 .00495 .00223\nlr init .00126 .00123 .00123 .00136 .00206 .00120\nlr end .000012 .000012 .000012 .000028 .000022 .000044\nInﬂuence weightβ - 0 .620 - 0 2.521\nMOA loss weight - 1.312 15.007 - 1.711 10.911\nCurriculumC - - 40 - - 226\nPolicy comparison - - KL - - KL\nTrain MOA only\nwhen visible - False True - False True\nTable 3: Optimal hyperparameter settings for the models in the model of other agents (MOA) experiment.\n(a) Cleanup\n (b) Tragedy\nFigure 7: Total collective reward obtained by agents trained\nto optimize for the collective reward, for the 5 best hyperpa-\nrameter settings with 5 random seeds each. Error bars show\na 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding\nwindow of 200 agent steps.\nCleanup and Harvest, as is shown in Figure 7. In both\ngames, the optimal value forη = 0.85. Interestingly, how-\never, the equality in the individual returns for these agents\nis extremely low. Across the hyperparameter sweep, no\nsolution to the Cleanup game which scored more than 20\npoints in terms of collective return was found in which all\nagents scored an individual return above 0. It seems that in\nCleanup, when agents are trained to optimize for collective\nreturn, they converge on a solution in which some agents\nnever receive any reward.\nNote that training agents to optimize for collective reward\nrequires that each agent can view the rewards obtained by\nother agents. As discussed previously, the social inﬂuence\nreward is a novel way to obtain cooperative behavior, that\ndoes not require making this assumption.\n5.3. Performance comparison between models and\nrelated work\nTable 4 presents the ﬁnal collective reward obtained by each\nof the models tested in the experiments presented in the\npaper. We see that in several cases, the inﬂuence agents\nare even able to out-perform the state-of-the-art results on\nthese tasks reported by ( ?), despite the fact that the solu-\ntion proposed by ( ?) requires that agents can view other\nagents’ rewards, whereas we do not make this assumption,\nand instead only require that agents can view each others’\nactions.\n5.4. Collective reward and equality\nIt is important to note that collective reward is not always\nthe perfect metric of cooperative behavior, a ﬁnding that was\nalso discovered by ? and emphasized by ?. In the case, we\nﬁnd that there is a spurious solution to the Harvest game, in\nwhich one agent fails to learn and fails to collect any apples.\nThis leads to very high collective reward, since it means\nthere is one fewer agent that can exploit the others, and\nmakes sustainable harvesting easier to achieve. Therefore,\nfor the results shown in the paper, we eliminate any random\nseed in Harvest for which one of the agents has failed to\nlearn to collect apples, as in previous work (?).\nHowever, here we also present an alternative strategy for as-\nsessing the overall collective outcomes: weighting the total\ncollective reward by an index of equality of the individual\nrewards. Speciﬁcally, we compute the Gini coefﬁcient over\ntheN agents’ individual environmental rewardsek\nt :\nG =\n∑N\ni=1\n∑N\nj=1|ei\nt−ej\nt|\n2N∑N\ni=1ei\nt\n, (6)\nwhich gives us a measure of the inequality of the returns,\nwhereG∈ [0, 1], with G = 0 indicating perfect equality.\nThus, 1−G is a measure of equality; we use this to weight\nthe collective reward for each experiment, and plot the re-\nsults in Figure 8. Once again, we see that the inﬂuence\nmodels give the highest ﬁnal performance, even with this\nnew metric.\n5.5. Collective reward over multiple hyperparameters\nFinally, we would like to show that the inﬂuence reward is\nrobust to the choice of hyperparameter settings. Therefore,\nin Figure 9, we plot the collective reward of the top 5 best\nhyperparameter settings for each experiment, over 5 random\nseeds each. Once again, the inﬂuence models result in higher\n\n<!-- page: 24 -->\n\n275\n276\n277\n278\n279\n280\n281\n282\n283\n284\n285\n286\n287\n288\n289\n290\n291\n292\n293\n294\n295\n296\n297\n298\n299\n300\n301\n302\n303\n304\n305\n306\n307\n308\n309\n310\n311\n312\n313\n314\n315\n316\n317\n318\n319\n320\n321\n322\n323\n324\n325\n326\n327\n328\n329\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\nCleanup Harvest\nA3C baseline 89 485\nInequity aversion (?) 275 750\nInﬂuence - Basic 190 1073\nInﬂuence - Communication 166 951\nInﬂuence - Model of other agents 392 588\nTable 4: Final collective reward over the last 50 agent steps for each of the models considered. Bolded entries represent\nexperiments in which the inﬂuence models signiﬁcantly outperformed the scores reported in previous work on inequity\naversion(?). This is impressive, considering the inequity averse agents are able to view all other agents’ rewards. We make\nno such assumption, and yet are able to achieve similar or superior performance.\ncollective reward, which provides evidence that the model\nis robust to the choice of hyperparameters.\n\n<!-- page: 25 -->\n\n330\n331\n332\n333\n334\n335\n336\n337\n338\n339\n340\n341\n342\n343\n344\n345\n346\n347\n348\n349\n350\n351\n352\n353\n354\n355\n356\n357\n358\n359\n360\n361\n362\n363\n364\n365\n366\n367\n368\n369\n370\n371\n372\n373\n374\n375\n376\n377\n378\n379\n380\n381\n382\n383\n384\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 8: Total collective reward times equality, R∗ (1−G), obtained in all experiments. Error bars show a 99.5%\nconﬁdence interval (CI) over 5 random seeds, computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. Once again, the models\ntrained with inﬂuence reward (red) signiﬁcantly outperform the baseline and ablated models.\n\n<!-- page: 26 -->\n\n385\n386\n387\n388\n389\n390\n391\n392\n393\n394\n395\n396\n397\n398\n399\n400\n401\n402\n403\n404\n405\n406\n407\n408\n409\n410\n411\n412\n413\n414\n415\n416\n417\n418\n419\n420\n421\n422\n423\n424\n425\n426\n427\n428\n429\n430\n431\n432\n433\n434\n435\n436\n437\n438\n439\nSupplementary Material for Social Inﬂuence as Intrinsic Motivation for Multi-Agent Deep RL\n(a) Cleanup - Basic inﬂuence\n (b) Harvest - Basic inﬂuence\n(c) Cleanup - Communication\n (d) Harvest - Communication\n(e) Cleanup - Model of other agents\n (f) Harvest - Model of other agents\nFigure 9: Total collective reward over the top 5 hyperparameter settings, with 5 random seeds each, for all experiments. Error\nbars show a 99.5% conﬁdence interval (CI) computed within a sliding window of 200 agent steps. The inﬂuence models\nstill maintain an advantage over the baselines and ablated models, suggesting the technique is robust to the hyperparameter\nsettings.", "evidence_summary": "0 evidence items inspected", "reason": "association was rewritten as causation", "recommended_action": "human_review"}
resolution: null
---

# Drift audit: question_1e0121d4bdc2f58cea1ca426

- correlation-to-causation
